Title: Intelligent Self-tuning Active EMI Filtering for Electrified Automotive Power Systems Using Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.28084v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 01:21:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Intelligent Self-tuning Active EMI Filtering for Electrified Automotive Power Systems Using Reinforcement Learning 

Mahuizi Lu a, Kelin Jia b, Rajib Goswami b, Yukun Hu c,d, ∗  

> aDepartment of Earth Science Engineering, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom
> bE-Powertrain, Jaguar Land Rover, Abbey Road, Whitley, Coventry, CV3 4LF, United Kingdom
> cDepartment of Civil, Environmental &Geomatic Engineering, University College London, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom
> dDynamic Systems Lab, Factulty of Engineering Sciences, University College London, London, WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom

Abstract 

The rapid electrification and intelligence of modern transportation systems place stringent demands on the electromagnetic compati-bility, reliability, and adaptability of automotive power electronics. In electric and autonomous vehicles, electromagnetic interference (EMI) generated by high-frequency switching power converters can compromise safety-critical functions, in-vehicle communications, and system e ffi ciency under dynamic operating conditions. Conventional passive EMI filters, while robust, are often overdesigned and lack adaptability, leading to increased weight, volume, and energy losses. This paper proposes an intelligent self-tuning active EMI filtering approach for electrified automotive power systems based on reinforcement learning (RL). The EMI mitigation problem is formulated as a Markov decision process, enabling an RL agent to continuously adapt filter parameters in response to time-varying interference characteristics. To improve robustness and generalisation under complex and non-stationary conditions, a variational autoencoder is employed for compact state representation, while a noise-based exploration mechanism enhances learning e ffi ciency and prevents suboptimal convergence. The proposed method is evaluated using experimentally measured EMI spectra from an automotive electric drive unit within a MATLAB /Simulink co-simulation framework. Results demonstrate consistent EMI attenuation improvements of 25–30 dB across a wide frequency range compared with conventional control strategies and passive filtering solutions. By reducing reliance on oversized passive components and enabling adaptive EMI suppression, the proposed framework supports lightweight, energy-e ffi cient, and reliable power-electronic systems for intelligent and green transportation applications. 

Keywords: Reinforcement learning, Active electromagnetic interference filtering, Latent state representation, Adaptive control, Power electronic systems 

1. Introduction 

The rapid transition toward electrified, connected, and intel-ligent transportation systems has fundamentally reshaped the design requirements of automotive power electronics. Elec-tric vehicles and autonomous driving platforms increasingly rely on high-power-density converters, fast-switching power-trains, and sophisticated in-vehicle communication systems to support energy-e ffi cient propulsion, advanced sensing, and real-time decision-making. These developments are central to the broader goals of green mobility, including improved energy effi ciency, reduced vehicle mass, and enhanced operational re-liability. However, one critical challenge arising from these technological developments is managing electromagnetic inter-ference (EMI) (Wang et al., 2023). Autonomous and connected vehicles, especially those featuring electric powertrains, demand stringent EMI control to ensure safety and operational function-ality. Switch-mode power supplies, integral to these advanced systems, inherently generate significant high-frequency EMI radiation due to frequent switching operations (Mainali and   

> ∗Corresponding authors
> Email address: yukun.hu@ucl.ac.uk (Yukun Hu)

Oruganti, 2010). Additionally, varying operating conditions, in-cluding power fluctuations, temperature variations, mechanical vibrations, and load shifts, necessitate highly adaptable EMI mitigation solutions. Traditionally, passive EMI filters (PEFs) have been the dom-inant solution for EMI suppression due to their simplicity, lin-earity, and inherent reliability (Kotny et al., 2011; Vedde et al., 2021). PEFs rely exclusively on passive components—such as resistors, capacitors, and inductors—whose fixed impedance characteristics attenuate unwanted frequency components. How-ever, this fixed-parameter nature imposes fundamental limita-tions. PEFs cannot amplify signals, often introduce signal at-tenuation and power losses, and exhibit limited selectivity and adaptability across wide frequency ranges (Jiraprasertwong and Jettanasen, 2015; Stella et al., 2022). Achieving stronger EMI attenuation typically requires additional passive components (Akagi and Doumoto, 2004), resulting in increased size, weight, and cost, which are increasingly incompatible with modern high-density power-electronic designs (Baumann et al., 2021; Hamza and Qiu, 2013). In electrified vehicles, these limitations di-rectly translate into increased vehicle mass, reduced packaging flexibility, and degraded energy e ffi ciency. Active EMI filters (AEFs) have emerged as a promising al-

> arXiv:2604.28084v1 [eess.SY] 30 Apr 2026

Nomenclature Abbreviations 

ACO Ant Colony Optimisation AEFs Active EMI Filters CM Common-Mode CT Current Transformer DC Direct Current DM Di ff erential-Mode EDU Electric Drive Unit EMI Ectromagnetic Interference EQRL Enhanced Q-value-based RL FFT Fast Fourier Transform GA Genetic Algorithm GSA Gravitational Search Algorithm LISN Line Impedance Stabilisation Network LV Low Voltage MDP Markov Decision Process MLP Multilayer Perceptron Op-Amps Operational Amplifiers PEFs Passive EMI Filters ReLU Rectified Linear Unit RL Reinforcement Learning RMSE Root Mean Squared Error SARSA State Action Reward State Action TD Temporal Di ff erence VAE Variational Autoencoder 

Symbols 

δ temporal-di ff erence (TD) error [-] 

ϵ greedy policy [-] 

η noise [-] 

γ discount factor [-] ˆm bias-corrected first-order moment estimate [-] ˆv bias-corrected second-order moment estimate [-] 

κ capacitance ratio [-] 

λ decay [-] 

D replay memory [-] 

N normal distribution [-] 

μ means [-] 

ω window function [-] 

π policy [-] 

σ standard deviation [-] 

τEMI target EMI threshold [dB μA] 

A set of all actions [-] 

P probability [-] 

r reward [-] 

S set of all state space [-] 

θ weight [-] 

ε small positive constant value [-] 

a action space [-] 

C capacitor [ F]

f frequency [ Hz ]

G gain [-] 

I current [ A]

L inductor [ H]

N number of samples in the signal [-] 

n discrete time index [-] 

Q action-value function [-] 

qπ(s, a) state-action value function [-] 

R resistor [ Ω]

s state space [-] 

t time [ s]

V voltage [V] 

vπ(s) state-value function [-] 

x discrete signal value [-] 

y target value [-] 

Z impedance [ Ω]

z latent variables [-] 

m first-order moment estimate of TD error [-] 

v second-order moment estimate of TD error [-] ternative capable of overcoming many of these limitations (Ri-vas et al., 2003). By integrating active elements such as op-erational amplifiers and transistors with passive components (vanWyk et al., 2005), AEFs o ff er controllable gain, high input impedance, and low output impedance, enabling enhanced EMI suppression performance (Narayanasamy and Luo, 2019). The use of smaller inductors in AEFs further reduces physical foot-print, parasitic e ff ects, and improves high-frequency behaviour, which is critical for e ff ective EMI mitigation (Chen et al., 2009). Moreover, through active feedback mechanisms, AEFs can gen-2erate frequency-selective cancelling signals, allowing them to respond more flexibly to diverse and evolving interference pat-terns (Bendicks et al., 2022, 2020; Chen et al., 2006). Despite the se advantages, the performance of AEFs remains highly sensitive to component tolerances, environmental disturbances, and operating-point variations, making reliable self-tuning a persistent challenge. Conventional analogue design approaches, constrained by nonlinearity and complex multi-parameter inter-actions, often exhibit discrepancies between simulation-based tuning and real-world performance (Bao et al., 2024). Existing AEF tuning strategies typically rely on fixed-parameter designs (Madhuri and Kalavathi, 2024) or adaptive control schemes that require prior system knowledge and manual configuration (Darisi et al., 2024; Du et al., 2023). Metaheuris-tic optimisa,tion methods, e.g., Genetic Algorithm (GA) (Chen and Ye, 2019), gravitational search algorithm (GSA) (Chauhan and Yadav, 2023) and Ant Colony Optimisation (ACO) (Sak-thivel et al., 2015), o ff er greater flexibility but are inherently offl ine, computationally intensive, and unsuitable for real-time adaptation under rapidly changing EMI conditions. Supervised machine learning approaches (Chen and Ye, 2019), while ef-fective in specific scenarios, depend on labelled datasets and often struggle to generalise to unseen disturbances. The detailed comparison of the proposed technique with existing AEF tuning techniques is shown in Table 1. To address these limitations, this paper proposes a self-tuning active EMI filtering framework based on model-free reinforce-ment learning (RL), enabling continuous adaptation through direct interaction with the EMI environment. The EMI sup-pression problem is formulated as a Markov decision process (MDP), allowing an RL agent to learn optimal tuning policies without explicit system modelling. To enhance robustness and generalisation in high-dimensional EMI environments, a varia-tional autoencoder (VAE) is employed for unsupervised feature extraction and compact state representation. In addition, a noise network is integrated into the learning architecture to promote structured exploration and prevent premature convergence to suboptimal solutions. From an intelligent transportation perspec-tive, the proposed framework enables automotive power sys-tems to autonomously adapt to real-world driving and operating conditions. The high levels of electrification, stringent electro-magnetic compatibility requirements, and strongly time-varying operating conditions characteristic of modern automotive plat-forms make them a particularly demanding testbed for adaptive EMI mitigation. The main contributions of this paper are summarised as fol-lows: 

• An informatics-driven self-tuning AEF framework is pro-posed, which formulates adaptive EMI suppression as a Markov decision process and enables continuous online reconfiguration through model-free reinforcement learning. 

• A latent-state reinforcement learning architecture is de-veloped by integrating a variational autoencoder for un-supervised feature extraction with a noise-based explo-ration mechanism, improving robustness, generalisation, and learning e ffi ciency in high-dimensional, non-stationary EMI environments. 

• A practical voltage-sensing, current-controlled AEF circuit architecture is designed and used as the physical environ-ment for training and evaluation, incorporating damping and compensation networks to ensure wide-band stability. 

• Comprehensive simulation-based validation using exper-imentally measured EMI data from an automotive elec-tric drive unit demonstrates consistent EMI attenuation im-provements over conventional control strategies and base-line learning methods. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes methodology, including the self-tuning AEF archi-tecture and the formulation of the reinforcement learning frame-work. Section 3 details the experimental setup for modelling and simulations, EMI data processing, and training procedure. Sec-tion 4 presents the evaluation results and comparative analysis, and discusses future research directions. Section 5 summarises the key conclusions. 

2. Methodology 

This section provides a detailed overview of constructing a Self-Tuning AEF and its application within our proposed deep RL algorithm. We initially developed an AEF environment that provides real-time feedback on interference signals. This AEF system and its parameter configuration are then formulated as an MDP. The proposed method involves training an agent to develop an optimal o ffl ine-transferable strategy for dynamically adjusting the AEF parameters. The overall framework is illustrated in Figure 1. 

> Figure 1: The schematic depicting the application of our proposed method workflow

3Table 1: Comparison of AEF tuning techniques 

Technique Online adaptation Handles nonstation-ary EMI Model-free Exploration effi ciency High-dimensional state handling Generalisation ability 

Fixed-Parameter ✗ ✗ N/A N/A N/A N/AAdaptive Control ✓(limited) ✗ N/A N/A N/A N/AMetaheuristics ✗ ✓(o ffl ine) ✓ ✗ ✗ Moderate Supervised ML ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ Moderate Proposed Technique ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

2.1. Self-tuning AEF System Design 

The AEF’s general structure is designed to minimise noise in motor drive systems. It actively suppresses conducted noise on the power line by generating compensating voltages or cur-rents via a control amplifier. In this study, we adopt a voltage-sensing and current-control approach to optimise EMI suppres-sion while maintaining a compact and e ffi cient circuit structure. Voltage sensing eliminates the need for bulky current transform-ers and enables high sensitivity, while current control ensures su ffi cient bandwidth and current-handling capability to suppress both common-mode (CM) and di ff erential-mode (DM) noise. The AEF is implemented using a feedback control strategy, which provides strong adaptability to dynamic EMI conditions. A Q-value-based RL algorithm is employed to tune the filter parameters in real time, including compensation impedance, feedback gain, and bandwidth. The overall method ensures robust noise suppression without compromising system stability. In motor drive systems, EMI noise typically originates from both CM and DM sources, primarily due to high-speed switch-ing and rapid current transitions. E ff ective filtering is necessary at the system interfaces to prevent conducted EMI from propa-gating through power cables into external circuitry. Our design incorporates a feedback-based AEF that dynamically adapts to these EMI conditions. However, even with feedback control, stability challenges can arise at both low and high frequencies due to parasitic e ff ects and the inherent dynamics of operational amplifiers. To ensure robust and stable operation across a wide frequency range, we incorporate damping and compensation networks into the filter architecture. As shown in Figure 2, the feedback loop includes a multi-stage compensation network comprising 

Rfeedback for base feedback, Rcomp and Ccomp for low-frequency compensation, and Rcomp1 and Ccomp1 for high-frequency phase margin enhancement. Additionally, Zdamp and Cinject are included in the injection path to manage low-frequency resonance, while 

Csense provides voltage sensing feedback from the output node. These compensation and damping techniques follow the methodology in Chu et al. (2016). The low-frequency branch (Rcomp ∥ Ccomp ) and the high-frequency branch ( Rcomp1 ∥

Ccomp1 ) shape the loop phase, while the series damper Zdamp 

suppresses low-frequency resonance. The system’s switching frequency fswitching sets the usable con-trol bandwidth, whereas the cut-o ff frequency fcut-o ff separates actively compensated and naturally attenuated regions. Both 

> Figure 2: The circuit with damping and compensation components

parameters are iteratively tuned by the RL agent. 

Closed-loop transfer function. For the voltage-sensing, current-controlled feedback AEF in Figure 2, 

Vo(s) = Vs(s)

"

1 − G(s) Zfeedback (s)

Zs + Zfeedback (s)

#

, (1) where Vs(s) is the noise-source voltage, Vo(s) is the output voltage across Zload , Zs is the source impedance, Zfeedback (s) is the total feedback impedance, and G(s) is the frequency-dependent op-amp gain. The analytical structure of the transfer function and feedback impedance follows established modeling and stability analysis approaches in Chu et al. (2016); Goswami and Wang (2018), adapted to the voltage-sensing, current-injecting AEF topology shown in Figure 2. 

Loop-gain. The loop-gain that dictates phase- and gain-margin is 

Tfeedback (s) = GOL (s) G(s) Zfeedback (s)

Zs + Zfeedback (s) , (2) with GOL (s) the intrinsic open-loop gain of the op-amp. A large |Tfeedback ( jω)| enhances noise attenuation but can reduce phase margin if not properly compensated. 

Feedback impedance. From Figure 2, 

Zfeedback (s) =  1 

> Rfeedback

+ 1 

> Rcomp +1/(sC comp )

+ 1

> Rcomp1 +1/(sC comp1 )

−1

.

The resulting low- and high-frequency zeros flatten the phase response and suppress resonance. 4Bandwidth guideline. Applying the decade-rule bandwidth guideline, 

fcut-o ff = fswitching 

10 |attenuation level |/40 , (3) ensuring the control bandwidth remains at least one decade below the switching frequency. 

RL-assisted tuning procedure. The RL agent adjusts component values as follows: 

• Step 0 – Initialisation. Seed Cinject , Zdamp , and compensa-tion values from the measured EMI spectrum. Compute 

fcut-o ff via Eq. 3. 

• Step 1 – Injection-capacitor alignment. Fine-tune Cinject so its series resonance with L equals fcut-o ff :

L C inject = 1

κ (2 π fcut-o ff )2 , (4) where κ = Csense /Ccomp is the fixed capacitance ratio. 

• Step 2 – Feedback-gain optimization. The agent iteratively updates G(s) for maximum attenuation while monitoring the phase margin. 

• Step 3 – Damping-resistor tuning. With Cinject and κ fixed, 

Zdamp = κ

s

L

κ Cinject 

, (5) to prevent low-frequency oscillations. 

• Step 4 – Online fine-tuning. During operation, the policy continuously perturbs {G(s), Cinject , Zdamp } to maintain the optimal trade-o ff between attenuation and stability under varying EMI profiles. 

2.2. Problem Formulation and Representation of Decision Progress 

RL is a powerful branch of machine learning that enables adaptive control in dynamic environments. In this study, the AEF circuit with a tunable capacitor is modelled as an MDP, where the RL agent continuously interacts with the system to optimise capacitance and minimise EMI. The MDP is defined by a five-tuple ( S , A, P, γ, r), where: 

• S represents the set of all possible states within the AEF environment, consisting of EMI characteristics observed by the RL agent. At the timestep t,

S t = (EMI out , Ct, fresponse ) (6) where EMI out is the measured EMI spectrum, Ct is the capacitance value, and fresponse is the frequency domain response. 

• A represents the action space, which consists of discrete capacitor tuning adjustments. Since only the selected ca-pacitor is tunable in this study, the RL agent can select an action that modifies the capacitance value, i.e.: 

Ct+1 = Ct + ∆ C (7) where ∆C is capacitance adjustment chosen from a prede-fined set. 

• P(st, at → st+1) denotes the transition probability from state st to state st+1 given action at.

• γ ∈ (0 , 1) is the discount factor that quantifies the value of future rewards compared to immediate rewards. 

• r(s, a) specifies the immediate reward received for taking action a in state s, contributing to the total expected reward 

Reward .The cumulative long-term reward can be expressed as Eq. 8 

Reward =

> ∞

X

> i=0

γi r (st+i, at+i) (8) To estimate the values of state-action pairs, the Bellman equa-tion acts as a crucial link between theoretical concepts and practi-cal implementation. It provides a recursive method for updating the Q-value, which represents the expected cumulative long-term reward for a given set of actions and states. The Q-function under the policy π control is as shown in Eq. 9: 

Qπ(st, at) = Eπ[ rt | st, at] , (9) Where Qπ(s, a) represents the cumulative rewards obtained by taking action a in state s, and Eπ is the expected return Reward 

under policy π. The expected value of the Q-function, averaged over all possible actions under a given policy, constitutes the state value function Value π(s). This value can be calculated by taking the expectation of the Q-function across the entire action space A, as mathematically expressed in Eq. 10: 

Value π(st) =

X 

> at∈A

π(at | st) Qπ(st, at). (10) Eq. 10 is formulated for a stochastic polic π(at | st). In the process of tuning AEF circuit parameters, the state space reflects observations from the environment, capturing a comprehensive set of measured data. This includes sensed interference ampli-tudes, filter insertion losses, current, voltage, and overall filtering performance under controlled conditions. These parameters en-able a precise understanding of and adjustment to the circuit’s operational dynamics. Thus, the relationship between state and action at time t should be represented by the sensed informa-tion from the AEF circuit st. The adjustment at is made based on st, and after applying at, the updated circuit cancellation performance st+1 is realized. In tuning the AEF circuit parameters, the state space reflects observations from the environment and captures a comprehen-sive set of measured data (e.g., interference amplitudes, filter 5insertion losses, current, voltage, and overall filtering perfor-mance). These variables enable precise understanding and ad-justment of the circuit’s operational dynamics. At time step t,the state is denoted by st. Based on st, the agent selects an action 

at; after applying at, the environment transitions to the next state 

st+1 with an updated EMI response. The reward function in Eq. (11) encourages the agent to make optimal choices. 

rt =



log 10 (EMI st ) − log 10 (EMI st+1 ), if EMI st+1 ≤ τEMI ,

−15 , otherwise. (11) Here, EMI st and EMI st+1 denote the measured EMI output in-tensity before and after executing the tuning action at time step 

t, respectively. Specifically, EMI st corresponds to the EMI level observed at state st, whereas EMI st+1 denotes the filtered EMI level obtained at the next state st+1 after applying at. The term 

τEMI is the target EMI threshold that defines the acceptable emis-sion level, i.e., 15 dB μA in this study. If EMI st+1 ≤ τEMI , the reward equals the achieved attenuation (on a logarithmic scale); otherwise, a constant penalty of −15 discourages unstable or ine ff ective tuning behaviours. To ensure that the final strategy exhibits optimal generaliza-tion capabilities in o ffl ine applications and can accurately adapt to new environments for precise filtering outcomes, we focused on minimizing the agents’ reliance on stable circuit operational conditions. Additionally, we aimed to improve their robustness against variations in circuit parameters and external disturbances. To achieve this, we propose using a VAE model to process ob-servational data from circuits and their corresponding responses. The goal is to learn compact representations of this data and the associated actions in a latent space. The model consists of a deep encoder-decoder architecture, as shown in Figure 3. During the encoding phase, the struc-ture incorporates three layers of a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), combined with the nonlinear activation function Rectified Lin-ear Unit (ReLU) and fully connected layers, to extract critical features from the observational circuit data. Unlike traditional autoencoders, the VAE encodes the data into a probabilistic la-tent space, where the encoder outputs parameters, as depicted in Figure 6. Specifically, the means μ and standard deviations 

σ follow an assumed Gaussian distribution to represent latent variables z | s ∼ N (μ, σ 2), as expressed by Eq. 12. These probabilistic representation captures features such as interfer-ence types, intensity levels, and response patterns within the circuits, providing a robust foundation for modelling variability and noise. 

z = μ + σ · ϵ (12) where ϵ represents a noise term sampled from standard devia-tions N(0 , 1), facilitating the successful application of backprop-agation. Sampling from these distributions is accomplished using the reparameterization technique, which enables backpropagation through stochastic operations to facilitate learning. The sampled latent representation is then processed by a decoder composed 

> Figure 3: The structure of VAE: the left-side encoder maps input to the parameters from a Gaussian distribution while the right-side decoder reconstructs the latent variable from the sampling layer as output data

of four MLP layers to reconstruct outputs that closely resemble the original data. This reconstruction validates and reinforces the intrinsic characteristics of the data, as depicted in Figure 4. 

> Figure 4: The framework of the MLP constitution

Following the feature extraction and data encoding process, the output layer of the MLP is directly linked to the estimation of action values. The agent uses the observed states to predict the expected values for each action and selects actions based on these predictions. Simultaneously, it updates the MLP’s weights using rewards and new state information obtained from the environment. This end-to-end structure not only functions as a feature extractor but also serves as an approximator for the value function, enabling the agent to make rapid and accurate decisions in complex environments. By employing this approach, we can enhance the adaptability and performance of the strategy, ensuring that the agent maintains stable and e ffi cient operations, even in the face of environmental changes and disturbances. This configuration demonstrates excellent generalization capabilities, allowing the agent to adapt accurately to new environments and provide precise filtering e ff ects. 

2.3. Fundamentals of Proposed Enhanced Algorithm 

Our objective is to optimize and stabilize the real-time EMI cancellation response of AEF circuits while minimizing depen-dency on environmental changes. To achieve this, we adopt a model-free, Q-value-based algorithm as a reliable method. To further enhance exploration e ffi ciency, in addition to using the 6VAE with a Gaussian distribution for optimized state representa-tion, we also plan to incorporate a noise network into the action selection process during policy execution. This prevents the strategy from prematurely converging on suboptimal solutions, as described in Eq. 13. The increased noise disturbance factor η

facilitates broader exploration, allowing the agent to explore the potential policy space more thoroughly. 

at+1 = arg max 

> a

Q(st+1, at) + η (13) Furthermore, we utilize the temporal di ff erence (TD) error to update the Q-values, incorporating momentum and adaptive learning rates to improve the stability and e ffi ciency of the learn-ing process. This approach promotes convergence towards the target Q-values, as outlined in Eqs. 14 and 15. 

Q(st, at) ← Q(st, at) + α hQtarget − Q(st, at)i (14) 

Qtarget = rt + γ · Q(st+1, at+1; critic network) (15) To e ff ectively monitor the agent’s progress in optimizing its strategy, it is crucial to evaluate its performance throughout the training process. To this end, we establish a loss function, as defined in Eq. 16, which evaluates the updates made to the policy by minimizing the loss at each iteration. This approach not only tracks the learning progress but also ensures that the agent continuously refines its behaviour during the training phase. 

Loss = E

" 

rt + γ max 

> at+1

Q(st+1, at+1 | θ) − Q(st, at | θ)

2#

(16) Here, γ is the discount factor, and max at+1 Q(st+1, at+1 | θ) is the estimate Q value for the next state st+1 and action at+1. The parameter θ represents the weight of the MLP. The RL-assisted tuning process consists of two distinct phases: a training phase and an execution (inference) phase. During the training phase, the EQRL agent continuously interacts with the Simulink-based self-tuning AEF environment. At each iteration, the agent observes the current EMI state, selects an action (e.g., adjustment of injection capacitance or damping impedance), and receives a reward determined by the EMI attenuation perfor-mance. Algorithm 1 governs this training loop, in which both the Q-values and the neural-network parameters are iteratively updated until convergence to an optimal control policy. Once training is completed, the learned policy parameters are fixed. In the subsequent execution phase, the agent no longer performs learning or parameter updates but directly applies the trained policy to output control actions for new EMI states, thereby enabling real-time adaptive tuning of the AEF system. The EQRL algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 1. The working steps involved in the proposed EQRL are summarised in Figure 5. 

3. Experimental Setup 

This section outlines the implementation of the simulation environment and the algorithmic framework used in this study. Both the proposed algorithm and the simulator were developed and executed using the MATLAB /Simulink 2024 RL Toolbox. 

Algorithm 1: Enhanced Q-value based RL (EQRL) al-gorithm for self-tuning AEF circuit Initialize critic network with random weights; Initialize Q(s, a) = 0 and π(s, a) = 0 for all s, a;Initialize replay bu ff er D to store tuples ( st, at, rt, st+1); Observe initial state s0;Select initial action a0 randomly from action space A;Set maxE pisode ;

for episode = 1 to maxE pisode do 

t = 0; 

while st is not terminal do 

Execute at and observe next state st+1;

if EMI t+1 ≤ τEMI then 

rt = log 10 (EMI s) − log 10 (EMI t+1); 

else 

rt = −15; Store ( st, at, rt, st+1) in D;

if rand() < ε then 

Select at+1 randomly from A;

else 

at+1 = arg max a Q(st+1, at), using critic network; 

if length(D) ≥ BatchSize then 

Sample a random minibatch of transitions from D;

for each (st, at, rt, st+1) in minibatch do if st+1 is terminal then 

Qtarget = rt;

else 

Qtarget =

rt + γQ(st+1, at+1; criticNetwork); Calculate loss: L =

(Qtarget − Q(st+1, at+1; criticNetwork)); 

m(s, a) = β1m(s, a) + (1 − β1)δ;

v(s, a) = β2v(s, a) + (1 − β2)δ2;ˆm = mt (s,a)1−βt+11

;ˆv = vt (s,a)1−βt+12

;

Q(s, a) = Q(s, a) + α ˆm√ˆv+ε + η;

st ← st+1; at ← at+1;

ε = max( ε · 0.95 , 0.1); 

t ← t + 1; The simulations were conducted on a system equipped with an AMD Ryzen 7 5800H processor featuring integrated Radeon Graphics, operating at a clock speed of 3.20 GHz. The sys-tem operates on a 64-bit platform supported by an x64-based processor architecture. 

3.1. Data Processing 

In this study, the EMI signal dataset was collected from the output cables of an EDU. Table 2 summarizes the dataset’s 7Figure 5: The flowchart of the proposed EQRL algorithm 

composition and frequency range. To ensure precise capture and analysis of the EMI noise data, a detailed numerical analysis was performed. The noise information was extracted from the cables, and the data processing procedure involved generating sinusoidal waves corresponding to each detected EMI frequency and its harmonics. These generated signals were then introduced into the simulation circuit as a time series, emulating real-world EMI conditions. Following this, adaptive noise cancellation filtering was applied using the AEF. The resulting filtered data were subsequently transformed into the frequency domain via Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) for further performance analysis. 

> Table 2: Description of datasets and their characteristics

Datasets EMI range Input Variables Interferences amount 

Cable 44 150k-30MHz Frequencies, bandwidth, peak values, average val-ues, minimum values, time intervals. 6650 Cable 47 100k-30MHz Frequencies, bandwidth, peak values, average val-ues, minimum values, time intervals. 13290 Cable Bundle 150k-30MHz Frequencies, bandwidth, peak values, average val-ues. 13290 In the signal analysis process, a Hanning window is applied to mitigate spectral leakage, ensuring smoother signal boundaries. This windowing function allows the signal processed by the FFT to approximate a periodic signal, providing a more accurate representation of the true frequency components in the spectrum. Eq. 17 presents the formula for calculating the output of the filtered signal, where Magnitude ( f ) represents the signal ampli-tude, N denotes the number of samples in the signal, x(n) is the discrete signal value, and ω(n) refers to the window function. This method allows for precise quantification of the attenuation performance of the AEF against EMI. It is particularly useful in the tunable AEF circuit, which is controlled by an RL algorithm. To validate the feasibility of the proposed RL-assisted tunable solution for EMI suppression in the circuit, the topology shown in Figure 2 is employed as the operational environment for both the input signal and the resulting output data. 

Magnitude ( f ) = 2

N · | FFT [ x(n) · ω(n)] | (17) To emulate real-world EMI conditions within the simulation environment, EMI signals were injected into the AEF circuit model through the power line input using synthetic waveforms derived from measured EMI spectra. Specifically, sinusoidal signals representing dominant frequency components and their harmonics, extracted from the Cable Bundle dataset, were super-imposed on the (direct current) DC input of the EDU simulation block. These signals were constructed using a time-series wave-form generator in MATLAB and fed into Simulink via signal source blocks. The RL agent, implemented using the MATLAB RL Toolbox, interfaces with Simulink through an environment wrapper that exposes tunable parameters (e.g., Cinject ) and circuit state variables (e.g., EMI amplitude, frequency response). At each timestep, the agent observes the EMI-related states from the Simulink model, selects an action to adjust the tunable parameter value, and receives a reward based on the resulting attenuation, forming a closed-loop co-simulation between the RL logic and circuit dynamics. 

3.2. Tunable Circuit Simulation and Training 

The selection of the most e ff ective tunable component is cru-cial for achieving the optimal control objective in the tunable model. Figure 6 presents a Spearman correlation heatmap, ac-companied by a significance analysis, which illustrates the rela-tionships between various key components and their influence on the cut-o ff frequency. Through this analysis, it was determined that the injection capacitor and inductor have the most signif-icant impact on filter performance. Specifically, adjustments to these components result in notable changes to the cut-o ff 

frequency. However, in practical circuits, the physical size of inductors, combined with parasitic capacitance and resistance at high frequencies, can lead to instability in inductance values, which negatively a ff ects circuit performance. In high-frequency applications, these parasitic e ff ects can cause shifts in resonant frequency, complicating tuning e ff orts. As a result, the injec-tion capacitor is identified as the most suitable component for self-tuning. By employing an RL policy to control the injection capacitor, the AEF can optimize its performance in dynamic EMI environments, e ff ectively adapting to varying noise sources and enabling precise, real-time EMI suppression. A key concern regarding the feasibility of inductor-based tun-ing in EMI filter applications is the challenge posed by dynamic inductance adjustments due to the physical nature of inductors. Although solutions such as switchable inductance networks and magnetic core biasing o ff er limited adjustability, they also intro-duce added complexity, size, and switching noise. In contrast, active filtering techniques or field-programmable analogue ar-rays provide more practical alternatives by digitally emulating 8Figure 6: Spearman correlation heatmap and significance analysis 

inductance behaviour. Therefore, while real-time adjustment of physical inductors remains complex and less practical for high-frequency EMI filters, the use of injection capacitors for tuning with a set tunable range, controlled by the RL policy, off ers a more stable and precise method for dynamic EMI sup-pression. By utilising the RL policy to manage the injection capacitor, the AEF achieves optimal performance in dynamic EMI environments, adapting to varying noise sources and en-abling precise and e ffi cient EMI suppression. This approach ensures that the filter can maintain high performance without the limitations associated with inductors. The AEF circuit parameters, listed in Table 3, define the key operational settings of the active EMI filter. These include com-ponents such as inductors, capacitors, and resistors, all of which directly influence critical performance factors, including the cut-off frequency, filter bandwidth, and the overall e ff ectiveness of EMI suppression. Properly configuring these parameters ensures that the RL-based tuning strategy operates within its optimal range, providing the necessary flexibility to adapt to dynamic electromagnetic interference environments and e ff ectively sup-press them. In this work, we have used practical measurement data from an EDU to train the RL algorithm and adjust the active EMI filter parameters. The measurement block diagram from the Low Voltage (LV) harness cable bundle is shown in Figure 7. 

> Figure 7: Noise measurement from EDU LV harness

In this figure, EMI noise is detected from the LV harness us-ing a high-bandwidth current transformer (CT). The LV harness comprises cables originating from the Inverter, Motor, and other active sub-components of the EDU. The Line Impedance Stabil-isation Network (LISN) lies between the LV DC power supply and the component side of the harness. In the present work, the proposed active filter is being developed in a simulation platform, and we are currently in the process of creating the first prototype of the proposed active filter as the next phase of this project. The active EMI filter schematic is depicted in Figure 2 The related component values were chosen based on established principles in AEF design, as outlined in the methodologies proposed by Chu et al. Chu and Ramadass (2022); Chu et al. (2016). The key parameters, such as cut-o ff frequency, injection capacitance, feedback resistance, and damping resistance, were identified using standard filter design equations within these methodolo-gies. The values presented in Table 3 were derived from Chu and Ramadass (2022) and are widely regarded as optimal for designing AEFs that e ff ectively suppress EMI and maintain sta-bility. Although the injection capacitance Cinject is physically continuous, the EQRL implementation employs a discrete action space by dividing the tuning range (10 pF–500 nF) into a small symmetric set of incremental steps (e.g., ±∆C, ±2∆C) around the nominal value to ensure stable Q-value updates and e ffi cient training. 

> Table 3: Components parameters for the AEF circuit

Item Value 

Csense 100 nF 

Cin ject 470 nF (basic) (RL Control range 10 pF - 500 nF) 

Ccomp 1 nF 

Ccomp 1 100 nF 

L 1 μH

Rcomp 1 k Ω

Rcomp 1 0.5 Ω

R f eedback 50 k Ω

Zdamp 1.8 Ω

Zsource 5 Ω

In addition to the circuit parameters, the RL training hyper-parameters, outlined in Table 4, play a pivotal role in shaping the learning process of the agent. These hyperparameters in-clude the learning rate, discount factor, exploration-exploitation ratio, and batch size, each of which significantly influences how effi ciently the agent learns to tune the AEF. For instance, the learning rate determines how quickly the agent updates its pol-icy in response to feedback from the environment, while the exploration-exploitation ratio balances the exploration of new actions and the exploitation of known successful strategies. The selection and fine-tuning of these hyperparameters were guided by iterative experimentation and previous research, ensuring that the agent can learn an e ff ective policy within a reasonable time frame, while avoiding overfitting to the training data. Table 5 outlines the dataset configuration for RL training and 9Table 4: Hyperparameters setup for algorithms 

Variable Value 

Learning rate 0.001 Discount factor 0.99 Max episode 50 Optimizer Adam Noise disturbance factor 0.025 Max step size 6000 

Q-learning 

Epsilon greedy Exploration 1/0.001 /0.5 Critic network (400, 300) 

SARSA 

Epsilon greedy Exploration 1/0.001 /0.5 

DQN 

Replay bu ff er size 100000 Epsilon greedy Exploration 0.95 /0.001 /0.5 Target update rate 4

The proposed algorithm 

Epsilon greedy Exploration 0.99 /0.001 /0.5 Greedy decay rate 0.005 Replay bu ff er size 100000 Critic network (128, 64, 2, 2, 64, 128, 80) testing. The policy is trained through real-time interaction with the Cable Bundle dataset, which serves as the primary training environment where the agent interacts directly with the circuit. Additional datasets are used for o ffl ine testing to verify the policy’s generalization capability and robustness. The training process begins by applying a deep RL-based approach to opti-mize the tuning of Cinject from its initial improper value, allowing the agent to dynamically adjust the AEF’s cut-o ff frequency in response to EMI variations. Empirical testing indicated that a training duration of 50 episodes was su ffi cient to stabilize the learning process, enabling robust policy outcomes. Con-sequently, the training was limited to 50 episodes, a decision substantiated by the results, which demonstrated e ff ective policy learning within this timeframe. The agent continuously interacts with the environment, updating its policy based on the observed EMI characteristics and the corresponding filter performance. Over time, this interaction enables the agent to learn an optimal tuning strategy that minimizes EMI across a wide range of con-ditions, ultimately improving filter performance in real-world applications. 

> Table 5: Datasets arrangement for training and testing

Datasets Train Extraction test Offl ine test 

Cable 44 × × 6650 Cable 47 × × 6769 Cable Bundle 13290 4430 ×

3.3. Evaluation Metrics 

To accurately evaluate the performance of the RL algorithm in controlling AEF parameters, several key metrics are used to assess both the e ff ectiveness and accuracy of the algorithm. The primary metric is the insertion loss, measured in decibels (dB), which quantifies the EMI suppression achieved by the AEF under RL control. The insertion loss can be calculated using Eq. 18, which expresses a logarithmic ratio of the EMI intensity before and after filtering. This metric is widely employed in EMI filtering applications to assess how e ff ectively unwanted interference is attenuated. 

Insertion loss (dB) = 20 log 10 

Io

I f

(18) where Io represents the original EMI intensity, and I f denotes the filtered EMI intensity. In addition to the insertion loss, the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) is used to assess the accuracy of the AEF’s performance when controlled by the RL algorithm. The RMSE metric compares the insertion loss achieved under RL control with the required insertion loss across multiple test scenarios. This is essential for verifying the algorithm’s gen-eralization capabilities and consistency of performance across varying EMI environments. The RMSE can be calculated using Eq. 19: 

RMS E =

vuut 1

Ng NpNgX

> i=1
> Np

X

> j=1

hGa,i( f j) − Gr,i( f j)i2

(19) where Ng represents the number of unknown scenarios test dataset groups, and Np is the number of EMI data points within each test dataset group. Ga,i( f j) is the actual needed insertion loss for the i-th test dataset group at the j-th EMI data point, and 

Gr,i( f j) is the insertion loss of of i-th test dataset group at the 

j-th EMI data point under RL controlled performance. 

4. Results and Discussion 

In Sections 2.1 and 3.2, the self-tuning AEF model, controlled by an RL policy, was designed and simulated, respectively. All experimental comparisons were conducted using EMI noise levels sourced from the dataset outlined in Table 2, which covers a bandwidth ranging from 100 kHz to 30 MHz. This section presents a comparative analysis of training performance across various algorithms, with a primary focus on the proposed EQRL algorithm. 

4.1. Comparative Analysis of Training Performance 

In this section, we conducted a comparative evaluation of the training performance of various RL algorithms, with a particular focus on our proposed EQRL algorithm. The training process aimed to optimize the tunable components of the adaptive AEF circuit to achieve the desired EMI suppression. To assess the eff ectiveness of each algorithm, two key aspects were evaluated: convergence speed and cumulative reward, both of which are critical indicators of learning e ffi ciency. 10 Firstly, convergence speed refers to the time required for each algorithm to consistently achieve optimal filtering results. The faster the convergence, the more time-e ffi cient the algorithm is in dynamically adjusting circuit parameters. Secondly, the cu-mulative reward serves as a quantitative measure of the agent’s learning process, indicating how e ff ectively the algorithm maxi-mizes the reward function, which, in this case, is directly linked to the filter’s EMI suppression performance. As shown in Table 6, the experimental results highlight significant di ff erences in convergence speed and overall learning e ffi ciency across the tested algorithms. Notably, the EQRL algorithm demonstrated a faster convergence time compared to traditional algorithms such as State–action–reward–state–action (SARSA) and standard Q-learning. This rapid convergence is particularly advantageous in real-time applications, where quickly training an optimal policy can lead to substantial savings in both time and human resources. 

> Table 6: Quantitative rewards

Algorithms Cumulative average reward Running time /episode 

SARSA -7638.80 ± 926.76 86.08 s Q-Learning -7823.40 ± 505.93 81.40 s DQN -9628.80 ± 1894.49 11.16 s EQRL -5601.86 ± 501.53 10.07 s Additionally, the cumulative reward values clearly show that the EQRL algorithm consistently outperformed the other algo-rithms, including Deep Q-Network (DQN), in optimizing the AEF circuit parameters. Maintaining higher average reward scores throughout the training process proved more e ff ective in achieving the desired filtering performance, as evidenced by the close alignment between the actual required filtering result and the RL-controlled performance, as demonstrated in Figure 8. Therefore, the proposed EQRL algorithm exhibits superior training e ffi ciency and convergence speed, making it highly suit-able for real-time dynamic adjustments in AEF circuits. This also reflects that in fixed scenarios where the EMI spectrum remains fixed (without variations due to changes in operating conditions such as output power, temperature, or component ageing), although existing EMI suppression techniques can at-tenuate noise, the key advantage of our approach lies in its ability to self-tune and dynamically optimize the AEF parameters in response to variations in the noise spectrum. Conventional meth-ods, which rely on fixed parameter settings or manual tuning, become ine ff ective when the EMI characteristics change, lead-ing to suboptimal or degraded noise reduction performance over time. 

4.2. Evaluation of EQRL EMI Cancellation E ff ectiveness 

This section evaluates the o ffl ine performance of the trained policy when applied to untrained datasets, specifically Cable 44 and Cable 47. These datasets, characterized by distinct EMI noise profiles and broader frequency ranges, present an opportu-nity to assess the generalization and robustness of the proposed EQRL algorithm in managing unseen EMI conditions. 

> Figure 8: Extraction cable bundle dataset insertion loss and EMI signal filtering performance

4.2.1. Under untrained dataset 

The Cable 44 dataset, covering a frequency range of 150 kHz to 30 MHz, simulates a typical automotive EMI scenario with varying noise levels. Figure 9 illustrates the insertion loss perfor-mance without RL control, revealing significant fluctuations and insu ffi cient EMI suppression across the bandwidth. However, when the RL-controlled policy was applied, as depicted in Figure 10, a notable improvement in EMI suppression was observed. The algorithm dynamically adjusted the AEF parameters, result-ing in consistent filtering across the entire frequency range. As shown in Table 7, the RMSE for the insertion loss under the EQRL algorithm on the Cable 44 dataset was 2.0502, with an av-erage insertion loss of -29.15926 dB in the low-frequency range. This performance level demonstrates the algorithm’s ability to generalize e ff ectively from the training dataset to the untrained Cable 44 dataset, ensuring robust filtering performance without requiring retraining or manual parameter adjustments. Figure 11 also reflects that in fixed scenarios where the EMI spectrum remains fixed (without variations due to changes in operating conditions such as output power, temperature, or component ageing), although existing EMI suppression techniques can at-tenuate noise, the key advantage of our approach lies in its ability to self-tune and dynamically optimize the AEF parameters in 11 response to variations in the noise spectrum. Conventional meth-ods, which rely on fixed parameter settings or manual tuning, become ine ff ective when the EMI characteristics change, lead-ing to suboptimal or degraded noise reduction performance over time. 

> Table 7: Filtering performance under enhanced Q-value based algorithm control

Datasets Insertion loss RMSE Average Insertion loss of low frequency part 

Cable 44 2.05018792 -29.15926 dB Cable 47 2.89214039 -26.47199 dB Cable Bundle 0.58991 -30.88038 dB 

> Figure 9: Cable 44 dataset insertion loss and EMI signal filtering performance without RL control

4.2.2. Under o ffl ine unknown scenarios 

The Cable 47 dataset introduces additional complexity due to more severe EMI interference and a broader noise spectrum ranging from 100 kHz to 30 MHz. This dataset encompasses lower frequency EMI compared to the Cable Bundle dataset used for training, which spans 150 kHz to 30 MHz. Addition-ally, interference signals between 100 kHz and 350 kHz were introduced to simulate uncertainties commonly encountered dur-ing vehicle operation. Figure 11 demonstrates the performance 

> Figure 10: Cable 44 dataset insertion loss and EMI signal filtering performance

of the EQRL-controlled AEF on this dataset, showcasing the al-gorithm’s capacity to adapt to higher noise levels and a broader frequency range. In comparison to the scenario without RL control, the RL-based approach achieved superior EMI suppres-sion, particularly in filtering the lower frequency range, thus demonstrating improved generalization. The RMSE for the Cable 47 dataset was 2.8921, slightly higher than that of Cable 44, but still within the acceptable range for e ff ective EMI mitigation. The average insertion loss in the low-frequency range was -26.47199 dB, which, although marginally lower than that of Cable 44, still indicates robust suppression capability under challenging conditions. 

4.3. Trade-o ff s and Advantages 

To better illustrate the practical advantages of the proposed self-tuning active EMI filter (AEF), its performance and design characteristics are compared with those of commercially avail-able passive EMI filters (PEFs). The representative PEFs follow standard LC and π-type topologies, which are the most common configurations used in automotive DC /DC converter applications Chu et al. (2016); Vedde et al. (2021). These filters rely solely on fixed passive components and therefore provide e ff ective but static attenuation performance within a limited frequency range. In contrast, the proposed reinforcement learning (RL)–controlled 12 Figure 11: Cable 47 dataset with disturbance signal insertion loss and EMI signal filtering performance 

AEF integrates active compensation and adaptive parameter tun-ing, allowing the filter to dynamically adjust to changing EMI spectra and operating conditions. While classical PEFs typi-cally achieve 10–15 dB attenuation in their designed frequency band, the proposed AEF consistently maintains 25–30 dB atten-uation across a much wider frequency range (100 kHz–30 MHz). This improvement is particularly significant in dynamic EMI environments such as EDUs, where noise spectra shift due to variations in load, temperature, and switching conditions. How-ever, the added complexity of sensing, processing, and control increases design and power requirements compared to passive filters. Therefore, the primary trade-o ff lies in system complexity and power consumption. The AEF requires auxiliary circuitry for sensing, digital control, and compensation, which introduces modest computational and energy overhead. However, advances in embedded hardware (e.g., DSPs and FPGAs) increasingly mitigate these costs, enabling practical real-time implementation in automotive platforms. Table 8 summarises the key trade-o ff s and advantages of the proposed self-tuning active filter compared to commercially available passive EMI filters (PEFs). While commercially avail-able PEFs, such as the TPSF12C1, o ff er simplicity, compactness, and cost-e ff ectiveness, they rely on fixed parameters, which limit their adaptability to dynamic EMI conditions. While the cur-

> Table 8: Key trade-o ff s and advantages of the proposed self-tuning active filter compared to commercially available passive EMI filters

Feature Commercially available PEFs Proposed self-tuning AEFs 

Performance Fixed suppression, limited to the designed frequency range Adaptive suppression, eff ective across varying EMI spectra Flexibility Static design, optimized for worst-case EMI Dynamic adjustment based on real-time conditions Adaptability Limited, requires manual redesign for di ff erent applications Self-tunes to di ff erent EMI sources and environments Complexity Simple, easy to implement Requires additional sensing, control, and processing Power con-sumption Minimal (passive components) Moderate due to active processing Applicability Suitable for general automotive EMI filtering Ideal for advanced automotive power systems with dynamic EMI sources rent implementation focuses on a single tunable capacitor for simplicity and proof of concept, the proposed EQRL framework can be extended to accommodate multiple tunable components, such as feedback resistors, damping networks, or even gain set-tings across di ff erent AEF stages. In such multi-variable control scenarios, a multi-action RL formulation would be necessary, where the action space is defined over a vector of component adjustments rather than a scalar. The underlying EQRL struc-ture, including the use of a VAE for latent state compression and a noise network for enhanced exploration, remains appli-cable; however, additional care must be taken to manage the increased dimensionality of both the state and action spaces. Techniques such as factorised action representations or actor-critic extensions may be integrated to maintain training stability and convergence e ffi ciency. Although the proposed EQRL-controlled AEF system has been validated through simulation, several practical consider-ations must be addressed for real-time hardware deployment. A primary challenge lies in achieving low-latency signal acqui-sition, decision-making, and actuation within the control loop. The RL agent, particularly when implemented with deep neural networks and VAE encoding, requires su ffi cient computational resources to operate within the tight time constraints of EMI-sensitive systems, typically on the order of microseconds to milliseconds. Embedded implementation would therefore neces-sitate e ffi cient deployment on automotive-grade hardware such as Digital Signal Processors or Field-Programmable Gate Arrays with hardware-accelerated inference engines. Another critical bottleneck is the integration of high-precision, fast-response 13 digital-to-analog interfaces for tuning passive components in real time, especially if using digitally controlled capacitors or voltage-variable components. Additionally, the cost and power overhead introduced by the sensing, computation, and actuation circuitry must be justified against the EMI suppression benefits. Despite these challenges, recent advances in edge AI and re-configurable power electronics platforms suggest that real-time implementation of adaptive filtering strategies like EQRL is in-creasingly feasible, especially in high-end EV powertrains and autonomous systems where dynamic EMI conditions are preva-lent. Therefore, future work will revolve around developing and experimentally evaluating a real-time prototype of the proposed self-tuning AEF on representative automotive platforms, such as on-board chargers (OBCs) and DC /DC converters, including full EMC testing and comparison against established passive and hybrid EMI filtering solutions to assess deployment feasibility in production environments. 

5. Conclusions 

This study introduces a novel approach for dynamically con-trolling active EMI filters (AEFs) in automotive systems us-ing a proposed enhanced Q-value-based reinforcement learning (EQRL) algorithm. The research addresses the limitations of conventional passive and active filters in managing EMI in com-plex, dynamic environments. By developing a self-tuning AEF system, the proposed solution enables real-time adjustments to key circuit parameters, optimizing EMI suppression across a broad frequency range. The methodology employed in this study allows for more robust and adaptive EMI cancellation. Specif-ically, the use of deep RL, in conjunction with a variational autoencoder (VAE) for feature extraction, provided improved adaptability and generalization. This enabled the system to handle a wide variety of unpredictable EMI scenarios. Addi-tionally, the integration of noise networks enhanced exploration effi ciency, helping to avoid convergence on suboptimal solu-tions. Experimental results validated the e ff ectiveness of the EQRL algorithm, demonstrating faster convergence rates com-pared to traditional RL algorithms such as SARSA and standard Q-learning. The algorithm’s ability to dynamically adjust key circuit components, such as the injection capacitor, resulted in superior filtering performance, as indicated by lower RMSE values and higher cumulative reward scores across both trained and untrained datasets. The significance of this research lies in its practical application to automotive power systems, where dy-namic EMI conditions are becoming increasingly common due to the rise of electrification and autonomous vehicle technolo-gies. The proposed self-tuning AEF system not only enhances EMI suppression but also improves the overall reliability and stability of power systems in vehicles. By o ff ering a scalable and adaptive solution, this work contributes to the broader field of EMI management and sets the stage for future advancements in intelligent EMI filtering technologies. 

Declaration of Competing Interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Data availability 

Data will be made available on request. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank the financial support provided by the Royal Academy of Engineering through the Industrial Fellowship scheme (IF-2425-19-AI165). 

References 

Akagi, H., Doumoto, T., 2004. A passive emi filter for pre-venting high-frequency leakage current from flowing through the grounded inverter heat sink of an adjustable-speed motor drive system. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications doi: 10.1109/TIA.2005.853391 .Bao, J., Zhang, J., Huang, Z., Feng, X., Bi, Z., Zeng, X., Lu, Y., 2024. Multiagent based reinforcement learn-ing (ma-rl): An automated designer for complex analog circuits. IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , 1–1URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10525204/ , doi: 10. 1109/TCAD.2024.3398554 .Baumann, M., Abouzari, A.S., Weissinger, C., Gustavsen, B., Herzog, H.G., 2021. Passive filter design algo-rithm for transient stabilization of automotive power sys-tems, in: 2021 IEEE 93rd Vehicular Technology Confer-ence (VTC2021-Spring), IEEE. pp. 1–7. URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9449066/ , doi: 10. 1109/VTC2021-Spring51267.2021.9449066 .Bendicks, A., Dorlemann, T., Osterburg, T., Frei, S., 2020. Ac-tive cancellation of periodic emi of power electronic systems by injecting artificially synthesized signals. IEEE Electro-magnetic Compatibility Magazine 9, 63–72. URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9241554/ , doi: 10. 1109/MEMC.2020.9241554 .Bendicks, A., Gerten, M., Frei, S., 2022. Active cancella-tion of periodic cm emi at the input of a motor inverter by injecting synthesized and synchronized signals (s3-aef). IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 37, 11951–11961. doi: 10.1109/TPEL.2022.3172205 .Chauhan, D., Yadav, A., 2023. Optimizing the parameters of hybrid active power filters through a comprehensive and dynamic multi-swarm gravitational search algorithm. Engi-neering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 123, 106469. doi: 10.1016/J.ENGAPPAI.2023.106469 .14 Chen, H., Ye, S., 2019. Modeling and optimization of emi filter by using artificial neural network. IEEE Transactions on Elec-tromagnetic Compatibility 61, 1979–1987. URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8891888/ , doi: 10. 1109/TEMC.2019.2944887 .Chen, W., Yang, X., Wang, Z., 2006. An active emi filtering technique for improving passive filter low-frequency perfor-mance. IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibil-ity 48, 172–177. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ document/1614050/ , doi: 10.1109/TEMC.2006.870803 .Chen, W., Zhang, W., Yang, X., Sheng, Z., Wang, Z., 2009. An experimental study of common- and di ff erential-mode active emi filter compensation characteristics. IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility doi: 10.1109/TEMC.2009. 2021258 .Chu, Y., Ramadass, Y., 2022. How to ensure the stability and performance of an active emi filter. Analog Design Journal . Chu, Y., Wang, S., Wang, Q., 2016. Modeling and stability analy-sis of active /hybrid common-mode emi filters for dc /dc power converters. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 31, 6254– 6263. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/ 7332787/ , doi: 10.1109/TPEL.2015.2502218 .Darisi, M., Caldognetto, T., Biadene, D., Stellini, M., 2024. Digi-tal active emi filter for smart electronic power converters. Elec-tronics 13. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/ 13/19/3889 , doi: 10.3390/electronics13193889 .Du, L., Yan, D., Ma, D.B., 2023. A condition-adaptive △f

<sup >3</ sup > -emi control gan switching regulator with modulation frequency envelope tracking for full-spectrum automotive cispr 25 compliance, in: 2023 IEEE International Solid- State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), IEEE. pp. 304– 306. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/ 10067594/ , doi: 10.1109/ISSCC42615.2023.10067594 .Goswami, R., Wang, S., 2018. Modeling and stability analysis of active di ff erential-mode emi filters for ac /dc power converters. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 33, 10277–10291. doi: 10.1109/TPEL.2018.2806361 .Hamza, D., Qiu, M., 2013. Digital active emi control tech-nique for switch mode power converters. IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility 55, 81–88. URL: http: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6296700/ , doi: 10. 1109/TEMC.2012.2213590 .Jiraprasertwong, J., Jettanasen, C., 2015. Practical design of a passive emi filter for reduction of emi generation, in: Lecture Notes in Engineering and Computer Science. Kotny, J.L., Duquesne, T., Idir, N., 2011. Emi filter design using high frequency models of the passive components, in: 2011 IEEE 15th Workshop on Signal Propagation on Intercon-nects (SPI), IEEE. pp. 143–146. URL: http://ieeexplore. ieee.org/document/5898860/ , doi: 10.1109/SPI.2011. 5898860 .Madhuri, N., Kalavathi, M.S., 2024. Fault-tolerant shunt ac-tive power filter with synchronous reference frame control and self-tuning filter. Measurement: Sensors 33, 101156. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/ pii/S2665917424001326 , doi: 10.1016/j.measen.2024. 101156 .Mainali, K., Oruganti, R., 2010. Conducted emi mitiga-tion techniques for switch-mode power converters: A sur-vey. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 25, 2344– 2356. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/ 5444974/ , doi: 10.1109/TPEL.2010.2047734 .Narayanasamy, B., Luo, F., 2019. A survey of active emi filters for conducted emi noise reduction in power electronic converters. IEEE Transactions on Electro-magnetic Compatibility 61, 2040–2049. URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8915991/ , doi: 10. 1109/TEMC.2019.2953055 .Rivas, D., Moran, L., Dixon, J., Espinoza, J., 2003. Improv-ing passive filter compensation performance with active tech-niques. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 50, 161– 170. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/ 1174072/ , doi: 10.1109/TIE.2002.807658 .Sakthivel, A., Vijayakumar, P., Senthilkumar, A., Lakshmi-narasimman, L., Paramasivam, S., 2015. Experimental investigations on ant colony optimized pi control algo-rithm for shunt active power filter to improve power quality. Control Engineering Practice 42, 153–169. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0967066115000878 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.conengprac.2015.04.013 .Stella, F., Vico, E., Cittanti, D., Liu, C., Shen, J., Bojoi, R., 2022. Design and testing of an automotive compliant 800v 550 kva sic traction inverter with full-ceramic dc-link and emi filter, in: 2022 IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE), IEEE. pp. 1–8. URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9948096/ , doi: 10. 1109/ECCE50734.2022.9948096 .vanWyk, J., Lee, F., Liang, Z., Chen, R., Wang, S., Lu, B., 2005. Integrating active, passive and emi-filter functions in power electronics systems: A case study of some tech-nologies. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 20, 523– 536. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/ 1427810/ , doi: 10.1109/TPEL.2005.846553 .Vedde, A., Neuburger, M., Reuss, H.C., 2021. An op-timized high-frequency emi filter design for an automo-tive dc /dc-converter, in: 2021 National Power Electron-ics Conference (NPEC), IEEE. pp. 01–06. URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9672512/ , doi: 10. 1109/NPEC52100.2021.9672512 .Wang, C., Zheng, P., Bauman, J., 2023. A review of electric vehicle auxiliary power modules: Challenges, topologies, and future trends. IEEE Transactions on 15 Power Electronics 38, 11233–11244. URL: https: //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10158904/ , doi: 10. 1109/TPEL.2023.3288393 .16