Title: ML-assisted Subband Learned Digital Backpropagation for Nonlinearity Compensation in Wideband Optical Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.14481v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 00:52:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
> JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 1

# ML-assisted Subband Learned Digital Backpropagation for Nonlinearity Compensation in Wideband Optical Systems 

Evgeny Shevelev, Oleg Sidelnikov, Vitaly Danilko, Mikhail Fedoruk, and Alexey Redyuk 

Abstract —Digital backpropagation (DBP) is one of the most effective techniques for compensating nonlinear distortions in co-herent optical fiber communication systems. However, its practi-cal application to wideband transmission remains limited by high computational complexity caused by large channel memory and the requirement for fine spatial discretization. In this work, we propose a subband-based learned digital backpropagation (SbL-DBP) framework for wideband optical transmission systems. The received signal is decomposed into multiple subbands, enabling independent frequency-domain compensation of the chromatic dispersion with reduced effective channel memory and lower computational complexity. Nonlinear intra- and inter-subband interactions are addressed in the time domain using a trainable multi-input multi-output filtering structure. The parameters of the proposed framework are jointly optimized using end-to-end gradient-based learning. In addition, sparsification techniques are employed to remove insignificant coefficients and further reduce computational complexity. Numerical simulations of an 11 ×40 Gbaud WDM RRC-16QAM 20 ×100 km transmission system demonstrate that the proposed method provides a supe-rior performance–complexity trade-off compared to conventional DBP and enhanced DBP. In the low- and medium-complexity regimes, SbL-DBP provides higher signal-to-noise ratio gains while requiring fewer propagation steps. 

Index Terms —Nonlinearity, fiber-optic communication links, digital signal processing, nonlinear distortion compensation, dig-ital backpropagation, subband processing, machine learning. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# OPTICAL fiber communication systems are a key com-ponent of modern information infrastructure, supporting global Internet traffic, data center interconnects, and long-haul and transoceanic links. In recent years, the rapid growth of applications and services driven by artificial intelligence has further increased the demand for data transmission, especially within data centers and between them [1]. As a result, the need for higher transmission capacity continues to grow [2]. This demand is commonly addressed by increasing the symbol rate and expanding the signal bandwidth, leading to wideband transmission systems. However, one of the main limitations in this process is the nonlinear behavior of optical fiber, which distorts the transmitted signal and reduces the achievable spectral efficiency [3], [4]. These nonlinear effects, mainly caused by Kerr nonlinearity, become especially important in high-power and wideband systems, effectively turning the transmission link into a nonlinear channel with large memory. To address this issue, various digital signal processing (DSP) approaches for nonlinearity compensation in optical 

> The authors are with Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, 630090, Russia.

fiber have been proposed [5]–[8]. For practical applications, these approaches must provide high accuracy while maintain-ing low computational complexity and robustness to noise. Digital backpropagation (DBP) is one of the most well-known methods to compensate for both linear and nonlinear impair-ments in optical fiber systems. It is based on the numerical so-lution of the inverse nonlinear Schr¨ odinger equation, typically implemented using the split-step Fourier method (SSFM) [9]. Although DBP can provide significant performance gain, its practical use is limited by high computational complexity, since accurate compensation requires a large number of prop-agation steps involving forward and inverse discrete Fourier transforms (DFT) at each step. To reduce this complexity, several modified DBP ap-proaches have been proposed that retain the implementation of the linear step in the frequency domain while improving overall efficiency [10]–[15]. The enhanced split-step Fourier method (ESSFM) introduces a refined nonlinear step that ac-counts for the interaction between dispersion and nonlinearity, allowing the number of steps to be significantly reduced [11]. More recent works further extend this idea by optimizing system parameters, such as step lengths and nonlinear filters, including the learned ESSFM framework [13]. Another im-portant direction is perturbation-based DBP, where nonlinear effects are approximated using an analytical model derived from perturbation theory, leading to reduced computational complexity [14], [15]. Although these approaches significantly improve the performance–complexity trade-off, they still face important limitations. ESSFM-based methods often rely on simplified nonlinear filters that are identical for all steps and require specialized numerical optimization techniques, which may limit their flexibility in modeling complex signal evolution. Perturbation-based techniques, on the other hand, depend on approximations that may lose accuracy in strongly nonlinear or wideband scenarios. Moreover, most of these methods are designed for full-band processing and do not explicitly address the challenges associated with large channel memory in high symbol rate systems. In parallel, machine learning (ML) has been widely explored for nonlinear compensation in optical systems [16]–[20]. In particular, the learned DBP (LDBP) interprets the SSFM structure as a deep neural network and jointly optimizes its parameters using data-driven methods [19], [20]. These approaches can improve the performance–complexity trade-off by adapting the model to channel conditions. However, LDBP and its modifications rely on time-domain compensation of dispersion using finite impulse response (FIR) filters. As a result, the computational complexity scales with channel  

> arXiv:2605.14481v1 [physics.optics] 14 May 2026 JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 2

memory and increases rapidly for high symbol rates and wideband signals, which limits their practical applicability in high-capacity systems. Moreover, training long sequences of FIR filters is challenging, while finite-length truncation may introduce additional approximation errors. A key challenge in wideband systems is the large channel memory caused by chromatic dispersion. As the signal band-width increases, the dispersion-induced temporal spread of the signal grows, making both frequency-domain and time-domain DBP increasingly demanding in terms of computational com-plexity due to the requirement for reducing spatial step size. To address this issue, subband processing techniques have been proposed, where the signal spectrum is divided into several narrower bands [21]–[23]. Within each subband, the effective channel memory is reduced, enabling more efficient signal pro-cessing with shorter filters in both linear and nonlinear steps, as well as fewer required number of spatial steps. However, a non-trivial challenge in this approach is the accurate modeling of inter-subband nonlinear effects. Recent methods, such as subband DBP [24] and coupled-band ESSFM [25], improve performance by accounting for interactions between subbands and modeling cross-phase modulation effects more accurately. Nevertheless, these methods typically rely on predefined or analytically derived models of inter-subband interaction, which may limit their flexibility in complex transmission scenarios. In this work, we propose a novel low-complexity DBP framework based on subband processing, which integrates ML-assisted joint optimization of nonlinear phase rotation fil-ters within a DFT-based SSFM structure, enabling flexible and accurate modeling of both intra- and inter-subband nonlinear interactions. To address the large channel memory in wideband systems, the received signal is decomposed into multiple subbands, where linear effects are compensated independently in each subband in the frequency domain using DFT-based operations. In the nonlinear step, both intra-subband and inter-subband interactions are modeled in the time domain. Within each subband, nonlinear phase rotation is computed using con-volution of neighboring samples with a trainable filter, captur-ing intra-subband effects. Inter-subband nonlinear interactions are modeled through a set of coupled filtering operations, where the phase correction in each subband depends on the signal power in neighboring subbands. These interactions are implemented as a multi-input multi-output (MIMO) filtering structure with memory, mapping subband intensities to phase rotations through a set of learnable coefficients. All model pa-rameters are jointly optimized using end-to-end learning. This data-driven optimization enables the model to adapt to channel conditions without relying on predefined analytical approx-imations. Furthermore, sparsification techniques are applied during training to remove insignificant coefficients, thereby reducing computational cost while preserving performance. II. M ETHODS 

A. System Model 

We consider a coherent optical communication system with single-polarization transmission, where signal propagation in the fiber is governed by chromatic dispersion, Kerr nonlinear-ity, and attenuation. The evolution of the optical signal can be described by the nonlinear Schr¨ odinger equation (NLSE): 

∂A ∂z =



− α

2 − i β2

2

∂2

∂t 2 + iγ |A|2



A, (1) where A(z, t ) is the complex envelope of the optical field, 

z is the propagation distance, and t is time. The parameters 

α, β2 and γ denote the fiber attenuation, group-velocity dispersion, and the Kerr nonlinearity coefficient, respectively. The extension of the proposed approach to dual-polarization systems is straightforward. At the transmitter, the signal is generated as a sequence of modulated symbols shaped by a pulse shaping filter: 

A(z = 0 , t ) = pP0

X

> k

a[k]f (t − kT ), (2) where P0 is the launch power, a[k] are complex data symbols, 

f (t) is the pulse shape, and T is the symbol interval. In practical long-haul systems, periodic optical amplifica-tion is used to compensate for fiber losses. In this work, we consider lumped amplification using erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs), which introduce amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noise. As a result, the received signal is af-fected by both deterministic impairments described by Eq. (1) and additive noise. Signal propagation in optical fiber links is typically modeled using SSFM. In this approach, the fiber link is divided into short segments and signal evolution over each segment is approximated by alternating linear and nonlinear operations in accordance with Eq. (1). The linear step accounts for dispersion and attenuation in the frequency domain, while the nonlinear step models the Kerr effect in the time domain. The accuracy of this approximation depends on the number of segments used. In the following, we focus on wideband wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) transmission systems, where a large signal bandwidth leads to significant temporal spreading due to chromatic dispersion, resulting in increased channel memory. This effect makes nonlinear compensation more challenging and motivates the development of efficient DBP-based meth-ods. 

B. Digital Backpropagation 

Digital backpropagation is a widely studied multi-step technique for compensating deterministic signal distortions in optical fiber systems, including both linear and nonlinear impairments [9]. The method is based on the numerical solution of the inverse NLSE, where the received signal is digitally propagated backward along the transmission link. This is achieved by applying the SSFM with reversed fiber parameters, allowing for reconstruction of the transmitted signal. In DBP, the fiber parameters are inverted as α′ = −α,

β′ 

> 2

= −β2, and γ′ = −γ. Inverse propagation is approximated using SSFM, where each step consists of a linear and a nonlinear operation applied to the discrete-time signal. Let JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 3

u(k) = [ u(k)[n]] denote the signal at the k-th step. A single step of the symmetric SSFM can be expressed as follows. The linear operator is implemented in the frequency domain as 

uL = F−1 n

HL(ω, ∆z1) · F{ u(k)}

o

, (3) where F{·} and F−1{·} denote DFT and inverse DFT, re-spectively, and 

HL(ω, ∆z) = exp 

 

− α′

2 + i β′

> 2

2 ω2



∆z



(4) is the linear transfer function describing dispersion and atten-uation. The nonlinear operator is applied in the time domain as 

uNL [n] = uL[n] · exp  iγ ′|uL[n]|2∆z , (5) which accounts for Kerr nonlinearity through a phase rotation proportional to the instantaneous signal power. Combining both operations, a symmetric SSFM step can be written as 

u(k+1) = L∆z2



N∆z



L∆z1 (u(k))

 

, (6) where L∆z (·) and N∆z (·) denote linear and nonlinear op-erators, respectively, and ∆z1 = λ∆z, ∆z2 = (1 − λ)∆ z.For λ = 0.5, the conventional symmetric SSFM scheme is obtained [26], which provides second-order approximation accuracy with respect to the step size ∆z. However, this choice is not necessarily optimal in the context of DBP. When 

λ̸ = 0 .5, the scheme formally reduces to first-order accuracy, but an appropriate selection of λ may still improve nonlinear compensation performance in practice [25]. Throughout this work, the parameter λ was selected empirically based on the overall system performance. By cascading multiple steps, the full inverse propagation over the fiber link is approximated. In this formulation, the internal linear steps are applied with a step size of ∆z, while the first and last linear operations are performed with step sizes of λ∆z and (1 − λ)∆ z, respectively. It is well known that conventional DBP is computationally demanding due to the repeated application of forward and inverse Fourier transforms, especially when small step sizes are required to ensure high accuracy. To reduce this com-plexity, several modified DBP approaches have been proposed, including ESSFM [11], which modifies the nonlinear step to account for the interaction between dispersion and nonlinearity within each step. In conventional DBP, the nonlinear phase rotation depends only on the instantaneous signal power, as shown in Eq. (5). In contrast, ESSFM introduces a memory effect by incorporating neighboring samples: 

uNL [n] = uL[n] · exp iγ ′

> Nc

X

> k=−Nc

Ck |uL[n + k]|2∆z

!

, (7) where Nc defines the number of neighboring samples con-sidered, and Ck are real-valued coefficients that model the interplay between dispersion and nonlinearity. When Nc = 0 

and C0 = 1 , the expression reduces to the nonlinear step of conventional DBP. By incorporating this extended nonlin-ear interaction, ESSFM can significantly reduce the required number of steps while maintaining high accuracy. However, in most implementations, the coefficients Ck are predefined or shared across steps, which may limit the flexibility of the model in complex transmission scenarios. While these approaches improve the performance– complexity trade-off, they remain limited by fixed model structures and do not explicitly address the challenges associated with wideband signals. In particular, due to chromatic dispersion, effective channel memory increases quadratically with signal bandwidth [27], leading to asignificant growth in the temporal span of nonlinear interactions. As a result, accurate compensation requires long nonlinear filters and small spatial step sizes, which in turn leads to high computational resources. Subband processing provides a natural way to mitigate these limitations. By decomposing the signal into multiple subbands, the bandwidth of each component is reduced, which shortens the corresponding channel memory and enables more efficient processing. In addition, the reduced bandwidth and lower signal power within each subband relax the constraints on the SSFM step size. Specifically, narrower bandwidth reduces dispersion-induced temporal variations, while lower power decreases nonlinear phase accumulation, allowing larger spatial step sizes ∆z to be used while maintaining sufficient numerical accuracy. Motivated by these observations, we propose a subband-based DBP framework with learnable nonlinear interactions, enabling flexible and efficient modeling of both intra- and inter-subband effects. 

C. Proposed Subband Learned DBP Framework 

The proposed nonlinear compensation (NLC) framework is based on subband processing, which enables efficient handling of wideband signals with large channel memory [21]. The gen-eral structure of NLC is illustrated in Fig. 1. The method com-bines subband decomposition with a learned DBP algorithm operating in each subband, followed by signal reconstruction. The framework consists of three key blocks: an analysis filter bank (AFB), a subband learned DBP (SbL-DBP) module, and a synthesis filter bank (SFB). In the following subsections, we describe each part of the proposed approach, including signal decomposition, linear and nonlinear processing in the subband domain, and reconstruction of the full-band signal. 

1) Subband decomposition and signal representation: The analysis filter bank performs the decomposition of the wide-band input signal u[n] into Nsb subbands. This operation is implemented through a sequence of frequency shifting, filtering, and downsampling steps, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The input to the analysis filter bank is a wideband signal sampled at a rate Fs, typically satisfying Fs ≥ Rs, where Rs = 1 /T 

is the symbol rate. Let W denote the spectral support of the useful signal components, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 2. The center frequency of the j-th subband is defined as 

fj = − W 

> 2

+ WNsb 

 j − 12

 , j ∈ J = {1, . . . , N sb }. Following a standard filter bank implementation, the analysis stage applies a frequency shift operator Sj (·) to each subband. This operator multiplies the input discrete-time signal u[n] by a complex exponential Sj (u[n]) = u[n]e−i2πf j n/F s , which shifts the signal spectrum by −fj , aligning the center frequency of JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 4   

> Fig. 1. Scheme of a proposed NLC consisting of analysis filter bank, a subband learned DBP module and synthesis filter bank with Nsb subbands.

the j-th subband with zero frequency. After the frequency shift, a band-pass filter R(·) is applied to remove out-of-band components and isolate the desired subband. The resulting signal is then downsampled by a factor of Nsb , reducing the sampling rate proportionally to the bandwidth of each subband. As a result, the original wideband signal u[n] is represented as a set of Nsb subband signals vj [m] with reduced bandwidth and sampling rate. This representation reduces the effective channel memory in each subband and enables more efficient subsequent processing.             

> Fig. 2. Scheme of the wideband signal spectrum: W– spectral support of the useful signal components, Fs– sampling rate, Rs– symbol rate, fj–center frequency of the j-th subband, j∈ { 1, . . . , N sb }.

2) Subband processing: The set of subband signals vj [m],obtained after AFB, is fed into the SbL-DBP processing block. The overall processing flow is illustrated in Fig. 3 and summarized in Algorithm 1. The proposed approach follows the structure of symmetric DBP, introduced in Section II-B, while extending it to the subband domain. In the proposed framework, each DBP step consists of a linear and a nonlinear operation. The linear step is performed independently in each subband in the frequency domain, while the nonlinear step is carried out in the time domain and accounts for both intra-subband and inter-subband interactions. In the linear step, chromatic dispersion is compensated separately for each sub-band using DFT-based processing. Since the subband signals are represented in the baseband domain after analysis filtering, the original spectral position of each subband is restored in the linear operator by replacing ω with ω + 2 πf j , as shown in Fig. 3 and Algorithm 1. In the nonlinear step, the signal evolution is modeled using an extended nonlinear phase rotation that incorporates both intra-subband and inter-subband effects. Specifically, the nonlinear update for the j-th subband is given by 

wj [m] = vj [m] · exp 



iγ ′ηs

X

> l∈J
> Nc

X

> k=−Nc

Cjlk vl[m + k] 2∆z



,

(8) where j denotes the index of the current subband, l indexes interacting subbands, and m is the discrete-time sample index. Similarly to ESSFM, the parameter Nc defines the memory of the nonlinear interaction, i.e., the number of neighboring samples taken into account. The index s = 1 , . . . , N st denotes the propagation step, where Nst is the total number of steps, and ηs is a step-dependent scaling factor. This formulation generalizes the conventional DBP nonlinear step by incorpo-rating both temporal and inter-subband dependencies.    

> Fig. 3. Structure of the proposed SbL-DBP framework with Nst steps. Linear steps (green blocks) are performed independently in each subband in the frequency domain, nonlinear steps (blue blocks) model intra- and inter-subband interactions in the time domain using MIMO filtering.

The coefficients Cjlk are real-valued parameters that deter-mine the contribution of the l-th subband at time offset k to the nonlinear phase rotation in the j-th subband. For l = j,the coefficients Cjjk describe intra-subband nonlinear effects, specifically self-phase modulation (SPM) and its interaction with dispersion. For l̸ = j, the coefficients Cjlk capture inter-subband interactions, such as cross-phase modulation (XPM) between different spectral components. It should be noted that the proposed formulation does not explicitly account for four-wave mixing (FWM) interactions between subbands. In this way, the nonlinear step can be interpreted as a MIMO filtering operation, where the phase rotation in each subband depends on the intensity profiles of all subbands within a finite temporal window. When Nsb = 1 , Nc = 0 and C110 = 1 , the expression in (8) reduces to the standard nonlinear step of conventional DBP. The case with Nsb = 1 , Nc > 0 is referred to as enhanced DBP (EnDBP). The coefficients Cjlk are treated as trainable parameters and optimized using the end-to-end learning framework described in Section II-D. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 5

Algorithm 1 SbL-DBP processing for the j-th subband 

Input: subband signals {vj}j∈J from AFB 

ˆvj ← F (vj)ˆvj [m] ← ˆvj [m] · e−iβ 2(ωm+2 πf j )2λ∆z/ 2

vj ← F −1 (ˆvj)

wj [m] ← vj [m] · e−iγη 1   

> P
> l∈J
> PNc k=−Nc Cjlk vl[m+k]2
> ∆z

for s ∈ [2 , N st ] do 

ˆvj ← F (wj)ˆvj [m] ← ˆvj [m] · e−iβ 2(ωm+2 πf j )2∆z/ 2

vj ← F −1 (ˆvj)

wj [m] ← vj [m] · e−iγη s   

> P
> l∈J
> PNc k=−Nc Cjlk vl[m+k]2
> ∆z

end for 

ˆvj ← F (wj)ˆvj [m] ← ˆvj [m] · e−iβ 2(ωm+2 πf j )2(1 −λ)∆ z/ 2

˜vj ← F −1 (ˆvj)

Output: processed subbands {˜vj}j∈J for SFB 

3) Subband synthesis and reconstruction: The synthesis filter bank performs the reconstruction of the wideband signal 

˜u[n] from the set of Nsb processed subband signals ˜vj [m]. This operation is carried out by applying a sequence of steps that are inverse to those used in AFB, as shown in Fig. 1. In the first stage, each subband signal is upsampled to the original sam-pling rate. This is achieved by inserting Nsb −1 zeros between consecutive samples, thereby increasing the sampling rate by a factor of Nsb . After upsampling, a reconstruction filter R∗(·)

is applied to each subband signal. This filtering step suppresses the spectral images introduced by the upsampling process and restores the desired spectral shape of the signal. Next, an inverse frequency shift operator S−1 

> j

(·) is applied to each subband, translating it from the baseband back to its original center frequency fj . Finally, all reconstructed subband signals are summed to obtain the full-band signal. With properly designed analysis and synthesis filters, this process ensures an accurate (ideally perfect) reconstruction of the original signal. After SFB, the reconstructed signal is passed through a matched filter and the sampling rate is reduced to one sample per symbol for subsequent demodulation. 

D. End-to-end Training of SbL-DBP Parameters 

The proposed SbL-DBP framework introduces a set of trainable parameters in the nonlinear processing blocks, which enables flexible modeling of both intra- and inter-subband interactions. To efficiently determine these parameters, an end-to-end learning approach is employed, where the entire processing chain is optimized jointly. The SbL-DBP algorithm is implemented using framework PyTorch and is represented as a deep layered model composed of alternating linear and nonlinear blocks, following the structure of the SSFM, as illustrated in Fig. 4(a). In this representation, each SbL-DBP step corresponds to a layer of the model, which allows the use of gradient-based optimization via error backpropagation for joint training of all model parameters. The trainable parameters of the model include the scaling coefficients ηs, the MIMO coupling coefficients Cjlk , and the    

> Fig. 4. (a) End-to-end learning framework of the SbL-DBP, represented as a deep layered model with alternating linear and nonlinear blocks. The MIMO coefficients Cjlk are optimized jointly using gradient-based training. (b) Dynamics of training loss, validation loss, and learning rate, as functions of the training epoch.

coefficients of the convolution-based decimation filter (Conv block in Fig. 4(a)). After subband recombination by the SFB and matched filtering, the signal is downsampled to one sample per symbol using this trainable filter. Joint optimization of the decimation filter together with the nonlinear SbL-DBP parameters enables adaptive compensation of residual distortions prior to symbol detection and improves the overall end-to-end performance of the receiver. The coefficients ηs

and Cjlk are initialized to zero, corresponding to an initial model without nonlinear compensation beyond the linear SbL-DBP structure. This neutral initialization avoids imposing prior assumptions on the interaction model and allows the training process to adaptively learn the relevant nonlinear dependencies from the data. The training is performed in a supervised manner by min-imizing the loss function as the mean squared error (MSE) between the transmitted symbols a and the corresponding equalized output b:

L = 1

M

> M

X

> k=1

|a[k] − b[k]|2 . (9) This loss function directly reflects the quality of the signal reconstruction. Parameter updates are carried out using the Adam optimizer. To reduce computational complexity, sparsification is applied to the learned coefficients. In particular, a ℓ1-regularization term is added to the loss function to promote sparsity by penalizing small-magnitude coefficients: 

Ltotal = L + θ

X

> s

|ηs| + X

> j,l,k

|Cjlk |

 , (10) where θ controls the strength of the regularization. This encourages insignificant coefficients to approach zero during training, enabling their removal through pruning. As a result, the nonlinear operator acquires a sparse structure that reduces computational complexity while preserving the dominant non-JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 6

linear interactions. This also improves interpretability by iden-tifying the most relevant inter-subband interactions. To ensure robust generalization performance, the dataset is split into three independent subsets: training, validation, and test sets. Each subset consists of sequences of length 

219 samples. The training set is used to optimize the model parameters, the validation set is used to adjust hyperparameters and monitor convergence, and the test set is used only for the final evaluation of the trained model. During training, both training and validation sets are further segmented into blocks of size 212 samples, which are orga-nized into minibatches of three blocks each. The optimization is initialized with a learning rate of 0.5. A learning rate scheduler based on validation performance is applied, reducing the learning rate on plateau with a patience of 5 epochs and a reduction factor of 0.5.Fig. 4(b) shows the typical example of training and valida-tion loss curves, along with the evolution of the learning rate. Both losses decrease rapidly during the initial training phase, indicating efficient convergence. After approximately 30–40 epochs, the losses stabilize and reach a plateau, suggesting that the model has approached its optimal performance for the given data. The small gap between training and validation loss throughout training indicates good generalization and absence of significant overfitting. The learning rate is reduced stepwise according to the plateau-based scheduler, further supporting stable convergence. 

E. Computational Complexity Analysis 

In this section, we analyze the computational complexity of the proposed SbL-DBP method in terms of the number of real multiplications per processed symbol (RMpS), taking into account both linear and nonlinear operations. We consider a signal block u[n] consisting of N samples, which is decom-posed into Nsb subbands. Each subband signal vj [m] contains 

N ′ = N/N sb samples. The total number of DBP steps is indicated by Nst , and Nd symbols are discarded to mitigate edge effects introduced by block processing. 

1) Linear step: In the linear step, the fast Fourier transform (FFT) is used to compensate for chromatic dispersion. A single FFT (or inverse FFT) of length M requires approximately  

> M
> 2

log 2 M complex multiplications. In the proposed approach, the signal is processed in Nsb subbands, each of length N ′.Therefore, the total number of complex multiplications for the single linear step is given by: 

(N ′ log 2 N ′ + N ′) Nsb = ( N log 2 N + N − N log 2 Nsb ) .

(11) This expression shows that subband processing reduces the FFT complexity by N log 2 Nsb . Taking into account all linear operations within the SSFM structure, including the initial and final steps, the total complexity of the linear part per symbol, expressed in terms of real multiplications, is given by: 

Cl = 4( Nst + 1) N log 2 N + N − N log 2 Nsb 

(Rs/F s)N − Nd

, (12) where factor 4 accounts for the conversion from complex to real multiplications, and the term (Rs/F s)N represents the number of transmitted symbols corresponding to N processed samples. 

2) Nonlinear step: The nonlinear step is implemented in the time domain using a memory-based MIMO filtering structure. Its complexity is determined by several components. First, computing the squared magnitudes of the complex samples 

|vj [m]|2 requires two real multiplications per sample. Since the magnitudes are computed once for all samples in all subbands, this operation requires a total of 2N ′Nsb real multiplications. Second, the weighted summation with the MIMO coefficients 

Cjlk requires Nsb Nsb (2 Nc + 1) real multiplications. Third, multiplication by the scalar factor γ∆z requires Nsb real multiplications. Finally, applying the complex phase rotation for each subband requires four real multiplications per sample. Assuming that the exponential function is implemented via a lookup table, its computational cost is neglected. Under these assumptions, the total complexity of the nonlinear step per symbol is given by: 

Cnl = Nst 

N ′Nsb (2 + Nsb (2 Nc + 1) + 1 + 4) (Rs/F s)N − Nd

= Nst 

N (Nsb (2 Nc + 1) + 7) (Rs/F s)N − Nd

.

(13) 

3) Total complexity: The total computational complexity of the proposed SbL-DBP method is given by the sum of linear and nonlinear contributions: Ctotal = Cl + Cnl . The obtained expressions highlight important trade-offs of the proposed ap-proach. While subband decomposition reduces the complexity of the linear step by decreasing the FFT size, the nonlinear step introduces additional computations due to inter-subband interactions. However, the use of sparsification techniques, as described in Section II-D, significantly reduces the effective number of MIMO coefficients, leading to a favorable balance between accuracy and computational complexity. A detailed investigation of the sparsification procedure and the resulting complexity reduction is presented in Section III-D. It should be mentioned that this analysis does not account for the effects of memory access and subband parallelization, which may further improve the practical efficiency of the proposed method. III. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

In this section, we evaluate the proposed SbL-DBP method in terms of performance, complexity, and interpretability. We first analyze the impact of subband decomposition and the number of propagation steps, then study the structure of the learned nonlinear interactions, and finally investigate the trade-offs between performance and computational complexity. 

A. Simulation Setup 

We evaluate the proposed method using numerical sim-ulations of a wideband WDM transmission system. Fig. 5 shows the overall simulation and post-processing scheme. The transmitted signal consists of 11 WDM channels with a symbol rate of 40 GBaud and 16-QAM modulation. The channel spacing is set to 50 GHz and the launch power is fixed at 1 dBm per channel. Each channel is pulse-shaped using a root-raised cosine (RRC) filter with a roll-off factor of 0.1. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 7 

> Fig. 5. Simulation and DSP pipeline of the considered WDM system. RRC – root-raised cosine, MUX – multiplexer, SSFM – split-step Fourier method, DEMUX – demultiplexer, AFB – analysis filter bank, SbL-DBP – subband learned digital backpropagation, SFB – synthesis filter bank, Conv – convolution.

The transmission link comprises 20 fiber spans, each con-sisting of 100 km of standard single-mode fiber. The fiber parameters are attenuation α = 0 .2 dB/km, group velocity dispersion β2 = −21 .7 ps 2/km, and nonlinear coefficient 

γ = 1 .2 W−1km −1. After each span, EDFAs with a noise figure of 4.5 dB are used to compensate for fiber loss. The amplifiers introduce ASE noise, which is modeled as additive white Gaussian noise and accumulates along the transmission link. Each simulation run uses 218 transmitted symbols per WDM channel. Multiple independent realizations with ran-domly generated symbol sequences and ASE noise are used to construct the training, validation, and test datasets. The propagation of the signal along the link is governed by the NLSE (1) and is solved numerically using the symmetric SSFM. In the fiber simulation, a sampling rate of 30 samples per symbol (sps) is used. The step size within each span follows a logarithmic distribution with a finer resolution near the span input, where the signal power is higher. Specifically, the step size is selected such that the nonlinear phase shift accumulated over each step does not exceed 10 −3 rad. At the receiver, the central WDM channel is selected using an ideal rectangular bandpass filter and then downsampled from 30 to 2 sps, corresponding to a decimation factor of 15. The resulting signal is processed by the proposed NLC framework, which consists of AFB, SbL-DBP and SFB blocks, as shown in Fig. 1. For this stage we used Rs = 40 GBaud, 

W = 44 GHz, Fs = 80 GHz, N = 32768 , and Nd = 256 .The analysis and synthesis filters R(·) and R∗(·) are im-plemented as rectangular frequency-domain filters with band-width W/N sb and no overlap between neighboring subbands. After nonlinear compensation, a matched RRC filter is applied, followed by downsampling to one sample per symbol using a convolution-based filter. Symbol detection is then performed using a standard 16-QAM demodulator. The system performance is evaluated in terms of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at the receiver, computed from the measured bit error rate (BER) as 

SN R = 20 log 10 

h√10 erfc −1 (8 BER/ 3) 

i

, (14) where erfc −1(·) denotes the inverse complementary error function. In addition, performance improvement is quantified as ∆SN R = SN R N LC − SN R CDC , where SN R CDC 

corresponds to the SNR after compensation of chromatic dispersion only, and SN R N LC is the SNR after applying the proposed NLC method. For the considered link configuration and a launch power of 1 dBm, the baseline performance is 

BER CDC = 0 .0144 and SN R CDC = 13 .3 dB. 

B. Impact of Subband Decomposition and Number of Steps 

First, we analyze the impact of subband decomposition on the performance of the proposed method as a function of the number of spatial steps Nst . The results are shown in Fig. 6 (solid curves) for different numbers of subbands 

Nsb ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8, 11 }, while the nonlinear memory is fixed to Nc = 8. As expected, all curves exhibit a monotonic increase in SNR with increasing Nst , followed by saturation when further reduction in step size no longer improves the compensation accuracy. However, a more detailed analysis shows two distinct regimes with different behavior.             

> Fig. 6. SNR gain as a function of the number of steps Nst for SbL-DBP with different numbers of subbands Nsb ∈ { 1,2,4,8,11 }, the nonlinear memory is fixed to Nc= 8 (solid curves). Dashed curves correspond to filters optimized with symmetry and translational invariance constraints (sec. III-C).

In the regime of a small number of steps ( Nst < 10 ), the SNR gain increases with the number of subbands for a fixed Nst . In particular, the best performance is achieved for Nsb = 11 , while the full-band case ( Nsb = 1 ) provides the lowest gain. This behavior can be explained by the dominant role of the SSFM approximation error in this regime. With a limited number of steps, conventional full-band DBP cannot accurately capture the interaction between dispersion and nonlinearity, resulting in significant residual distortions. Subband decomposition mitigates this limitation by reducing the effective bandwidth within each subband. As a result, the corresponding dispersion-induced temporal spreading becomes smaller and the nonlinear evolution becomes more localized in time. This effectively increases the dispersion length within JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 8

each subband and improves the accuracy of the SSFM ap-proximation. Consequently, even with a small number of steps, SbL-DBP can more accurately compensate for dominant phase distortions, including SPM within each subband and XPM between subbands. Although FWM interactions are not captured in this approach, the improvement in SPM and XPM compensation outweighs the impact of unmodeled FWM. In contrast, for a sufficiently large number of steps ( Nst >

10 ), the trend reverses: the SNR gain decreases as the number of subbands increases and the best performance is achieved for the full-band case ( Nsb = 1 ). In this regime, the SSFM approximation error is already small due to the fine discretiza-tion of the propagation distance. Therefore, performance is no longer limited by numerical accuracy of SSFM, but rather by the ability of the model to capture all relevant nonlinear interactions. While SPM and XPM are well represented in the subband framework, FWM involves coherent interactions across a broader frequency range and is not fully captured when the signal is decomposed into independently processed subbands with simplified coupling. The strength and com-plexity of these inter-subband interactions increase with the number of subbands. As a result, residual nonlinear distortions accumulate and limit the achievable SNR. The results highlight a clear trade-off between the number of subbands and the number of spatial steps. Subband processing is particularly effective in the low-step regime, where it signif-icantly reduces the approximation error and enables accurate nonlinear compensation with limited resources. However, as the number of steps increases, its relative advantage diminishes and may even become negative due to incomplete modeling of broadband nonlinear interactions, especially FWM. At the same time, these trends must be interpreted in the context of computational complexity, which plays a critical role in practical system design and is analyzed in the following subsections. 

C. Analysis of MIMO Coefficients 

The coefficients of the MIMO filter Cjlk form a real-valued three-dimensional tensor of size Nsb × Nsb × (2 Nc + 1) . From perturbation analysis of the NLSE, it follows that these coeffi-cients theoretically satisfy a set of symmetry and translational invariance properties [25]. To better understand the structure of the learned nonlinear interactions, we analyze the learned coefficients both with and without explicitly applying these properties during training. 1) The symmetry property can be written as 

Cjlk = Clj −k. (15) In particular, for the coefficients corresponding to SPM, this condition reduces to even symmetry with respect to the time index: 

Cjjk = Cjj −k. (16) 2) The translational invariance property states that the coef-ficients depend only on the relative distance between the interacting subbands and not on their absolute indices. In other words, they are invariant under a simultaneous shift of the indices: 

Cjlk = Cj+m l +m k ∀m : l + m, j + m ∈ J . (17) Taking into account properties (15) and (17), the coefficient tensor can be represented by only Nsb unique vectors cp,indexed by the subband separation p = |j − l|. For example, when Nsb = 4 , the full tensor is reduced to four groups corresponding to p = 0 , 1, 2, and 3, i.e., the main diagonal and the three off-diagonal interaction classes: 

c0 : C11 k = C22 k = C33 k = C44 k,

c1 : C12 k = C23 k = C34 k = C21 −k = C32 −k = C43 −k,

c2 : C13 k = C24 k = C31 −k = C42 −k,

c3 : C14 k = C41 −k.

Fig. 7 shows the learned coefficients for Nsb = 4 , Nc = 16 ,and Nst = 20 . The colored solid curves correspond to the co-efficients obtained without imposing the symmetry and trans-lational invariance constraints, while the black dashed curves show the vectors cp computed under (15)-(17) constraints. In both cases, the coefficients are normalized with respect to the maximum absolute value. The notation C∗ 

> jl

in the figure denotes the time-reversed coefficients, i.e. C∗ 

> jlk

= Cjl −k.The corresponding ∆SN R values are nearly identical for the constrained and unconstrained models, at approximately 

1.53 dB, which confirms that the imposed properties do not degrade performance. Fig. 7(a) shows the coefficients corresponding to p = 0 ,which describe intra-subband effects. In this case, the central coefficient at k = 0 , corresponding to SPM, is significantly larger than the remaining coefficients. Most significant coeffi-cients are concentrated within the interval k ∈ [−8, 8] , while          

> Fig. 7. Normalized coefficients Cjlk for the case Nsb = 4 , N c= 16 , N st = 20 calculated without constraints (colored solid curves) and calculated with constraints on the conditions (15)-(17) (black dashed curves). JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 9

the outer taps remain close to zero. In addition, the vectors C11 

and C44 , as well as C22 and C33 , closely coincide pairwise due to the frequency symmetry of the corresponding subbands. Although the unconstrained coefficients do not exactly satisfy translational invariance, this has little impact on performance, indicating that multiple coefficient configurations can achieve similar SNR values. For the constrained vector c0, only the few central coefficients remain significant, while the remaining taps are close to zero. Figs. 7(b)-(d) show the coefficient vectors for p = 1,

2, and 3, corresponding to inter-subband XPM interactions. In all cases, the constrained and unconstrained coefficients exhibit very similar structures. Unlike the intra-subband case, the inter-subband coefficients naturally satisfy the symmetry and translational invariance properties even without explicitly enforcing them during training, indicating that their struc-ture is strongly determined by the underlying propagation physics. The largest coefficients are located near k = 0,and their magnitude decreases with increasing p, showing that the interaction strength becomes weaker for more distant subbands. In addition, distinct side peaks appear at k = ±3

for p = 1 , k = ±5 for p = 2 , and k = ±8 for p = 3 .These peaks correspond to the relative group delay between subbands induced by chromatic dispersion. As the frequency separation between subbands increases, the relative walk-off also increases, shifting the interaction maxima toward larger values of |k|.Beyond the coefficient-level analysis, the impact of the imposed constraints on the overall system performance is further validated in Fig. 6. The solid curves correspond to unconstrained MIMO filters, while the dashed curves represent models trained with the symmetry and translational invariance constraints applied (labeled “sym. filters” in the legend). As can be seen, the constrained models closely follow the performance of their unconstrained counterparts across all considered configurations, with only minor deviations caused by optimization variability. These results confirm that enforc-ing properties (15)-(17) preserves the nonlinear compensation performance, while significantly reducing the number of inde-pendent coefficients. The symmetry and translational invariance properties (15)-(17) provide a reduction in computational complexity, specif-ically in the weighted summation with MIMO coefficients at the nonlinear step. By exploiting these properties, the number of unique coefficients is reduced from N 2

> sb

(2 Nc +1) to 

(Nsb − 1)(2 Nc + 1) + ( Nc + 1) , while redundant computations between equivalent coefficient groups are eliminated. As a result, the computational complexity of the nonlinear step per processed symbol becomes 

Csym nl = Nst  

> 32

N  Nsb 

 Nc + 12

 + 5 

(Rs/F s)N − Nd

. (18) All subsequent results for the SbL-DBP method are obtained using the constrained formulation, which provides improved computational efficiency without a noticeable loss in SNR performance. 

D. Sparsification of MIMO Coefficients 

To further reduce the computational complexity of SbL-DBP, we investigate pruning of the learned MIMO filters. The main idea is to remove coefficients that contribute only marginally to nonlinear compensation while preserving the dominant nonlinear interactions responsible for SNR gain. To achieve this, an additional regularization term is incorporated into the loss function according to (10). This regularization pe-nalizes a large number of nonzero coefficients and encourages low-magnitude coefficients to approach zero during training. To determine the optimal regularization strength, we analyze the dependence of the achieved ∆SN R on the regularization weight θ. The corresponding results are shown in Fig. 8 for the SbL-DBP configuration with Nst = 10 , Nsb = 4 , and 

Nc = 8 . Without regularization ( θ = 0 ), the model achieves 

∆SN R = 1 .43 dB. As the regularization weight increases, the magnitude of many coefficients decreases, leading to a progressively sparser nonlinear operator. At the same time, strong regularization degrades compensation accuracy and reduces the achieved SNR gain.                

> Fig. 8. SNR gain ∆SN R as a function of the weight decay θfor the SbL-DBP with Nst = 10 ,Nsb = 4 , and Nc= 8 . Inset: (a) distribution of the learned MIMO coefficient magnitudes for θ= 5 ·10 −4, (b) coefficient distribution after sparsification.

Based on this trade-off, we select the operating point corresponding to θ = 5 ·10 −4, indicated by the blue star marker in Fig. 8. At this point, the model still preserves most of its nonlinear compensation capability while already exhibiting a pronounced concentration of low-magnitude coefficients. The corresponding distribution of the learned coefficient magni-tudes is shown in the inset (a) of Fig. 8. Guided by this distribution, we apply an additional pruning stage by setting to zero all coefficients with magnitudes below a threshold of 4.5 · 10 −2. This threshold is chosen to balance sparsity and performance degradation. As a result, 35 out of 68 coefficients (51.5%) are removed from the nonlinear operator. After pruning, the remaining nonzero coefficients are further fine-tuned through additional training without regularization in order to compensate for the performance loss caused by sparsification. The resulting coefficient distribution is shown in inset (b) of Fig. 8. Importantly, despite the more than twofold reduction in the number of active coefficients, the performance degradation remains negligible. After retraining, the pruned model achieves JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 10 

∆SN R = 1 .42 dB (red star marker), compared to 1.43 dB for the original dense model. These results indicate that the SbL-DBP framework contains a substantial degree of parameter redundancy and that sparsification can significantly reduce computational complexity while preserving nearly the same nonlinear compensation performance. 

E. Performance–Complexity Trade-off 

Next, we evaluate the performance of the SbL-DBP method in terms of the trade-off between SNR gain and computational complexity and compare it with DBP and EnDBP. To ensure a fair and comprehensive comparison, we consider the Pareto-optimal performance of each method. For this, a wide range of parameter configurations is evaluated for each approach, and the Pareto front is then constructed by selecting only those configurations for which no other configuration achieves both higher SNR and lower complexity. For DBP, the optimization is performed over the number of spatial steps Nst , for EnDBP – over Nst and nonlinear memory Nc, for SbL-DBP – over 

Nst , Nc and the number of subbands Nsb . Fig. 9 shows the SNR gain as a function of complexity, where all evaluated configurations are depicted as transparent markers and the resulting Pareto fronts for all methods as solid curves.          

> Fig. 9. Improvement of the signal-to-noise ratio ∆SN R as a function of the computational complexity for DBP-based methods: DBP (green triangles), EnDBP (orange squares indicating all realizations for different Ncand Nst
> values), and SbL-DBP (blue circles indicating all realizations for different
> Nsb ,Nc, and Nst values). The curves represent the Pareto-optimal sets. Red star markers represents SbL-DBP with sparsified MIMO coefficients.

It can be seen that, across the entire range of computational complexity, DBP consistently provides the lowest perfor-mance. EnDBP significantly improves upon DBP by incorpo-rating a nonlinear step with memory, which partially captures the interaction between dispersion and nonlinearity. As aresult, EnDBP achieves a substantially better performance– complexity trade-off, particularly in the low- and medium-complexity regimes. In the high-complexity regime the per-formance of DBP and EnDBP becomes comparable. Most importantly, the proposed SbL-DBP method demonstrates a clear advantage over both DBP and EnDBP in the low- and medium-complexity regimes. For example, at a complexity of approximately 500 RMpS, SbL-DBP ( Nsb = 13 , Nst = 1 ,

Nc = 6 ) achieves an SNR gain of about 0.94 dB, compared to 0.58 dB for EnDBP ( Nst = 2 , Nc = 14 ) and 0.13 dB for DBP ( Nst = 2 ). Similarly, at a complexity of approximately 1600 RMpS, SbL-DBP ( Nsb = 6 , Nst = 4 , Nc = 12 ) achieves an SNR gain of about 1.3 dB, compared to 1.24 dB for EnDBP (Nst = 8 , Nc = 20 ) and 0.61 dB for DBP ( Nst = 10 ). The observed performance advantage can be interpreted as follows. By decomposing the signal into subbands, SbL-DBP reduces the bandwidth and channel memory within each subband, enabling more accurate modeling of nonlinear phase evolution. At the same time, inter-subband interactions are captured through a learnable MIMO structure. As a result, the increase in computational complexity grows more slowly than the corresponding improvement in SNR, leading to a more favorable performance–complexity trade-off. In the high-complexity regime (above ∼ 4 · 10 3 RMpS), the gap between SbL-DBP and EnDBP becomes smaller, and EnDBP may slightly outperform SbL-DBP for certain config-urations. This behavior is consistent with the observations in Section III-B. In this regime, the main limitation is the ability to capture broadband nonlinear interactions, such as FWM, which are only partially modeled in the subband framework. In addition, Fig. 9 includes several SbL-DBP configurations with sparsified MIMO coefficients, indicated by red star mark-ers. These points demonstrate that applying coefficient pruning after training can further improve the performance–complexity trade-off. 

F. Optimal Number of Subbands 

Here we investigate the selection of the optimal number of subbands Nsb for the proposed SbL-DBP method. Fig. 10 shows the SNR improvement achieved by SbL-DBP as a func-tion of the number of subbands for several complexity levels. The markers correspond to different SbL-DBP configurations with fixed Nsb , while the parameters Nst and Nc are adjusted to satisfy a predefined complexity budget. The star markers indicate the operating points that provide the maximum ∆SNR for each complexity level.   

> Fig. 10. SNR gain as a function of the number of subbands Nsb for SbL-DBP under different computational complexity constraints.

The obtained results show that the optimal number of subbands strongly depends on the target computational com-plexity. In the low-complexity regime, larger values of Nsb 

are preferable, with the best performance achieved for approx-imately Nsb = 16 . In this regime, the dominant limitation is JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 11 

the SSFM approximation error caused by the small number of spatial steps. Subband decomposition reduces the effective bandwidth and channel memory within each subband, which improves the accuracy of nonlinear compensation and enables efficient processing even with a limited number of steps. However, further increasing the number of subbands beyond the optimal value leads to performance degradation due to the increasing importance of broadband nonlinear interactions, particularly FWM, which are not fully captured within the considered subband framework. In contrast, in the high-complexity regime, lower values of 

Nsb become optimal. In this case, the SSFM approximation error is already sufficiently small due to the larger number of spatial steps, and the main limitation shifts to the accuracy of nonlinear interaction modeling. Using fewer subbands better preserves broadband nonlinear interactions while still benefit-ing from moderate channel memory reduction. Therefore, the optimal choice of Nsb represents a trade-off between improved numerical accuracy obtained through subband decomposition and the ability to accurately model broadband nonlinear ef-fects. 

G. Performance versus Launch Power 

To further evaluate the robustness of the proposed method, we compare the performance of SbL-DBP with EnDBP and DBP as a function of the launch power in the range from -4 to 2 dBm. To ensure a fair comparison, all methods are evaluated under equal computational complexity constraints. Three representative complexity levels are considered: (i) low complexity ( ≈ 3 · 10 2 RMpS), (ii) medium complexity (≈ 10 3 RMpS), and (iii) high complexity ( ≈ 10 4 RMpS). For each complexity level, the parameters of all methods are selected to maximize the achieved SNR while ensuring that the total computational cost matches the target value. The resulting dependence of the achieved SNR on the launch power per channel is shown in Fig. 11.          

> Fig. 11. SNR as a function of launch power per channel for SbL-DBP, EnDBP, and DBP under equal computational complexity constraints. Three representative complexity regimes are considered: low ( ≈3·10 2RMpS, dotted), medium ( ≈10 3RMpS, solid), and high ( ≈10 4RMpS, dashed).

For the low-complexity regime, the following configurations are used: Nst = 1 , Nc = 1 , Nsb = 16 (SbL-DBP); Nst = 1 ,

Nc = 5 (EnDBP); Nst = 1 (DBP). In this regime, all methods operate with a very limited number of steps, which makes the approximation error of nonlinear compensation dominant. Across the entire power range, SbL-DBP consistently provides the highest SNR. The gain is moderate at low launch powers (noise-limited regime), but becomes more pronounced as the power increases. At 1 dBm, which corresponds to the operat-ing point used in the previous sections, SbL-DBP provides an SNR gain of approximately 0.47 dB over EnDBP and 0.61 dB over DBP. For the medium-complexity regime, the following configu-rations are used: Nst = 3 , Nc = 4 , Nsb = 11 (SbL-DBP); 

Nst = 4, Nc = 30 (EnDBP); Nst = 6 (DBP). At this complexity level, all methods achieve improved performance due to increased model completeness. However, the relative trends remain similar. SbL-DBP continues to outperform both EnDBP and DBP across all launch powers, despite using a smaller number of steps. The performance gain is especially visible in the nonlinear regime (around 0 to 2 dBm), where nonlinear distortions dominate. Compared to EnDBP, SbL-DBP achieves an SNR improvement of approximately 0.07-0.11 dB, while the gap to DBP remains larger. For the high-complexity regime, the following configura-tions are used: Nst = 40 , Nc = 16 , Nsb = 2 (SbL-DBP); 

Nst = 60 , Nc = 8 (EnDBP); Nst = 65 (DBP). At this complexity, all methods approach their performance limits and the differences between them become smaller. This reduced gap compared to lower complexity regimes is expected, as increasing the number of steps improves the accuracy of all methods. However, in this regime, EnDBP consistently outperforms SbL-DBP across the considered power range, likely due to its more effective modeling of FWM interactions. IV. C ONCLUSION 

We have proposed a subband-based learned digital back-propagation framework for compensation of nonlinear dis-tortions in wideband optical communication systems. The proposed approach combines subband signal decomposition with a trainable DBP structure, where chromatic dispersion is compensated independently in each subband in the frequency domain, while nonlinear intra- and inter-subband interactions are modeled in the time domain using a learnable MIMO filtering structure. All model parameters are jointly optimized using end-to-end gradient-based learning. By reducing the bandwidth of individual subbands, the proposed framework decreases the effective channel memory and relaxes the requirements on the spatial discretization step, enabling more computationally efficient modeling of nonlinear interactions. In addition, the proposed sparsification procedure reduces the number of active nonlinear coefficients by more than a factor of two while preserving nearly the same compensation performance. Numerical simulations of a wideband 11 ×40 Gbaud WDM RRC-16QAM 20 ×100 km transmission system demonstrate that the proposed SbL-DBP framework provides a supe-rior performance–complexity trade-off compared with conven-tional DBP and EnDBP methods, particularly in the low- and medium-complexity regimes. In these regimes, the approach JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, MAY 2026 12 

achieves higher SNR gains while requiring fewer propagation steps. Furthermore, the method demonstrates stable perfor-mance over a wide range of launch powers. The obtained results indicate that combining subband pro-cessing with a learnable modeling of nonlinear interaction is a promising direction for low-complexity nonlinear compensa-tion in future high-capacity wideband optical communication systems. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This research was funded by the Russian Science Foun-dation (Grant No. 25-61-00010), https://rscf.ru/project/25-61-00010/. REFERENCES [1] D. Barnes, “Five AI trends impacting telecom in 2026,” Adtran Blog, Feb. 26, 2026. [Blog]. Accessed: Mar. 19, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.blog.adtran.com/en/five-ai-trends-impacting-telecom-in-2026 [2] E. Agrell, M. Karlsson, F. Poletti, S. Namiki, X. Chen, L. A. Rusch, B. Puttnam, P. Bayvel, L. Schmalen, Z. Tao, F. R. Kschischang, A. Alvarado, B. Mukherjee, R. Casellas, X. Zhou, D. van Veen, G. Mohs, E. Wong, A. Mecozzi, M. Al-Slim, E. Diamanti, and M. Uysa, “Roadmap on optical communications,” Journal of Optics , vol. 26, no. 9, Art. 093001, 2024. [3] P. J. Winzer, D. T. Neilson, and A. R. Chraplyvy, “Fiber-optic trans-mission and networking: the previous 20 and the next 20 years,” Opt. Express , vol. 26, no. 18, pp. 24190–24239, 2018. [4] S. K. O. Soman, “A tutorial on fiber Kerr nonlinearity effect and its compensation in optical communication systems,” Journal of Optics , vol. 23, no. 12, Art. 123502, 2021. [5] A. Amari, O. A. Dobre, R. Venkatesan, O. S. Sunish Kumar, P. Ciblat, and Y. Jaouen, “A Survey on Fiber Nonlinearity Compensation for 400 Gb/s and beyond Optical Communication Systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 19, iss. 4, pp. 3097–3113, 2017. [6] S. Savory, “Digital coherent optical receivers: algorithms and subsys-tems,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. , vol. 16, iss.5, pp. 1164–1179, 2010. [7] J. Zhao, Y. Liu, and T. Xu, “Advanced DSP for coherent optical fiber communication,” Appl. Sci. , vol. 9, iss. 19, Art. 4192, 2019. [8] A. Redyuk , O. Sidelnikov, and M. Fedoruk, “Compensation of nonlinear signal distortions in optical fiber communication systems,” Optics Com-munications , vol. 578, Art. 131418, 2025. [9] E. Ip and J. M. Kahn, “Compensation of Dispersion and Nonlinear Impairments Using Digital Backpropagation,” J. Lightwave Technol. , vol. 26, no. 20, pp. 3416–3425, 2008. [10] Z. Xiao, Q. Zhuge, S. Fu, F. Zhang, M. Qiu, M. Tang, D. Liu, and D. V. Plant, “Low complexity split digital backpropagation for digital subcarrier-multiplexing optical transmissions,” Optics Express , vol. 25, iss. 22. pp., 27824–27833, 2017. [11] M. Secondini, D. Marsella, and E. Forestieri, “Enhanced split-step Fourier method for digital backpropagation,” in The European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC) , Cannes, France, 2014, pp. 1–3. [12] X. Liang and S. Kumar, “Correlated digital back propagation based on perturbation theory,” in Optics Express , vol. 23, iss. 11., pp. 14655–14665, 2015. [13] D. Cellini, S. Civelli, and M. Secondini, “ML-Enhanced Digital Back-propagation for Long-Reach Single-Span Systems,” arXiv, 2026. [14] A. Redyuk, E. Shevelev, V. Danilko, T. Bazarov, M. Senko, L. Samod-elkin, O. Nanii, V. Treshchikov, and M. Fedoruk, “Learned perturbation-based digital backpropagation with low complexity for nonlinearity compensation,” Opt. Continuum , vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 2896–2913, 2025. [15] X. Lin, S. Luo, S. K. O. Soman, O. A. Dobre, L. Lampe, D. Chang, and C. Li, “Perturbation Theory-Aided Learned Digital Back-Propagation Scheme for Optical Fiber Nonlinearity Compensation,” J. Lightwave Technol. , vol. 40, no. 7, pp. 1981–1988, 2022. [16] O. Sidelnikov, A. Redyuk, S. Sygletos, M. Fedoruk, and S. Turitsyn, “Advanced Convolutional Neural Networks for Nonlinearity Mitigation in Long-Haul WDM Transmission Systems,” J. Lightwave Technol. , vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2397–2406, 2021. [17] P. Freire, S. Srivallapanondh, B. Spinnler, A. Napoli, N. Costa, J. E. Prilepsky, and S. K. Turitsyn, “Computational Complexity Optimization of Neural Network-Based Equalizers in Digital Signal Processing: A Comprehensive Approach,” J. Lightwave Technol. , vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 4177–4201, 2024. [18] S. Luo, S. K. O. Soman, L. Lampe, and J. Mitra, “Deep Learning-Aided Perturbation Model-Based Fiber Nonlinearity Compensation,” J. Lightwave Technol. , vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 3976–3985, 2023. [19] V. Oliari, S. Goossens, C. Hager, G. Liga, R. M. Butler, M. van den Hout, S. van der Heide, H. D. Pfister, C. Okonkwo, and A. Alvarado, “Revisiting Efficient Multi-Step Nonlinearity Compensation With Machine Learning: An Experimental Demonstration,” J. Lightwave Technol. , vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 3114–3124, 2020. [20] C. H¨ ager and H. D. Pfister, “Physics-Based Deep Learning for Fiber-Optic Communication Systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 280–294, 2021. [21] C. H¨ ager and H. D. Pfister, “Wideband Time-Domain Digital Back-propagation via Subband Processing and Deep Learning,” in European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC) , 2018. [22] Z. Fan, J. Luo, B. Zheng, Y. Cai, and J. Zhao, “Subband Processing for OQAM Digital-Subcarrier-Multiplexing Optical Coherent Systems,” 

J. Lightwave Technol. , vol. 43, no. 9, pp. 4218–4232, 2025. [23] W. Guo, H. Deng, X. Tang, Z. Fan, Y. Cai, and J. Zhao, “Perturbation-aided fiber nonlinear compensation based on subband decomposition and synthesis for optical coherent systems [Invited],” Chin. Opt. Lett. , vol. 24, no. 3, Art. 030003, 2026. [24] E. Ip, N. Bai, and T. Wang, “Complexity versus performance trade-off for fiber nonlinearity compensation using frequency-shaped, multi-subband backpropagation,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. Expo. (OFC/NFOEC), Los Angeles, CA, USA, Mar. 2011, pp. 1–3. [25] S. Civelli, D. P. Jana, E. Forestieri, and M. Secondini, “A New Twist on Low-Complexity Digital Backpropagation,” J. Lightwave Technol. , vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 4679–4692, 2025. [26] G. Agrawal, “Nonlinear Fiber Optics”, Elsevier. Boston, MA, USA. 2013 [27] S. J. Savory, “Digital filters for coherent optical receivers,” Opt. express ,vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 804–817, 2008.