Title: HFORD: Hybrid Forward Optimization and Reverse Design Method and Its Applications to On-Chip Millimeter-Wave Inductive Elements

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22393v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 02:58:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS 1

# HFORD: Hybrid Forward Optimization and Reverse Design Method and Its Applications to On-Chip Millimeter-Wave Inductive Elements 

Yuzhen Song, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Yifan Wang, Graduate Student Member, IEEE ,Guqiao Chen, Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Hanyu Liu, Graduate Student Member, IEEE ,Qi Wu, Member, IEEE , Guangyi Lu, Member, IEEE , Haiming Wang, Member, IEEE ,and Wei Hong, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —On-chip inductive elements are pivotal in determin-ing both the silicon footprint and performance of millimeter-wave (mmWave) integrated circuits. However, the layout-level synthesis of these passive devices is severely challenged by highly nonlinear geometry-to-performance mappings, computationally expensive full-wave electromagnetic simulations, topology-dependent design spaces, and the inherent non-uniqueness of inverse design. To overcome these bottlenecks, we propose a hybrid forward op-timization and reverse design (HFORD) method for the target-to-layout synthesis of mmWave inductive elements. Utilizing a unified core to map device-level requirements to layout-level seeds, HFORD structures direct device targets and translates circuit specifications into a hierarchical synthesis flow. Specifi-cally, sparse-fitting sampling is introduced to improve coverage across critical performance regions, while compact response-fitting coefficients significantly reduce training dimensionality. The HFORD core integrates a random forest for topology selec-tion, a variational autoencoder for spectral feature generation, a mixture density network for probabilistic inverse mapping, and particle swarm optimization for latent space exploration. This integration improves the feasibility of the generated layout seeds under design rule check (DRC) constraints. Two design examples demonstrate that the proposed method accelerates the design cycle from hours to minutes compared to conventional optimization methods. 

Index Terms —Inverse design, machine learning, mixture den-sity network, on-chip passive device, optimization methods. 

Manuscript received June 11, 2026; revised **** **, ****; accepted **** **, ****. Date of publication ***** **, ****; date of current **** **, ****. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFB4404803, and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 62371120 and 62574040. ( Corresponding authors: Haiming Wang and Qi Wu. )Yuzhen Song, Yifan Wang, Guqiao Chen, and Hanyu Liu are with the State Key Laboratory of Millimeter Waves and the School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China, and also with the R&D Department, National Center of Technology Innovation for EDA, Nanjing 210031, China (e-mail: yuzhensong@seu.edu.cn; yifan-wang@seu.edu.cn; chenguqiao@seu.edu.cn; hyliu2021@seu.edu.cn). Guangyi Lu is with the School of Integrated Circuits, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China, and also with the R&D Department, National Center of Technology Innovation for EDA, Nanjing 210031, China (e-mail: guangyilu@seu.edu.cn). Qi Wu, Haiming Wang, and Wei Hong are with the State Key Lab-oratory of Millimeter Waves and the School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China, and also with the Pervasive Communication Research Center, Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China (e-mail: qiwu@seu.edu.cn; hmwang@seu.edu.cn; weihong@seu.edu.cn). Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# ON-CHIP inductive elements, such as spiral inductors and transformers [1], are fundamental building blocks for millimeter-wave (mmWave) integrated circuits (ICs) in emerg-ing 5G/6G and automotive radar applications. They occupy a substantial chip area and critically affect system performance, including gain, noise figure, and power efficiency. However, designing these devices at mmWave frequencies remains a challenge. Severe parasitic effects, such as skin effect and substrate coupling, make analytical formulas inaccurate and re-quire full-wave electromagnetic (EM) simulations (e.g., HFSS, EMX). Since these simulations are computationally expensive, the traditional experience-driven and trial-and-error design process becomes time-consuming and inefficient. To tackle these challenges, heuristic optimization algorithms such as the genetic algorithm (GA) [2], [3] and the parti-cle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm [4], [5] have been employed to automate the exploration of high-dimensional parameters. However, they rely on iterative EM solver calls and suffer from slow convergence and high computational costs. Machine learning (ML) surrogate models, such as deep neural networks (DNNs) and Gaussian processes [6]–[11], have been introduced to replace time-intensive simulations with millisecond-level inference. Although surrogate-assisted optimization improves evaluation efficiency, most existing approaches still follow a forward modeling paradigm in which electromagnetic responses are predicted from predefined geo-metric variables and fixed topologies, and the final geometry still requires an external optimization loop. Data-driven reverse engineering has emerged as a promising paradigm for generating structures directly from specifications [12], [13]. Early attempts using multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) to learn the backward mapping [14], [15] suffer from inverse non-uniqueness because multiple geometries can correspond to identical S-parameter targets, and the standard regression loss tends to converge to the statistical mean of possible solutions. This averaging effect is detrimental in engineering design since the resulting geometries may violate discrete physical constraints, such as non-integer turns, or fail to reproduce the desired EM specifications. Tandem networks and generative adversarial networks (GANs) have been proposed to mitigate this issue [16], [17], but tandem networks are difficult to train  

> arXiv:2606.22393v1 [cs.CE] 21 Jun 2026 2IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS

and computationally heavy, while GANs often suffer from mode collapse and training instability. Moreover, most existing works target planar antennas or metasurfaces. For mmWave on-chip passives, which require strict DRC compliance and accurate control, these black-box models still lack sufficient physical constraints and interpretability. Recent architectural innovations have attempted to address these limitations. A multivalued neural network (MNN) re-solves one-to-many mappings by simultaneously outputting N

geometric sets [18], but it introduces computational overhead in the post-selection process based on forward models and lacks probabilistic confidence. Non-uniqueness is mitigated by employing a transfer function-based network to filter the generated structure using the forward branches of poles and residues derived from target |S11 | curves in [19]. However, its dependence on detailed target curves limits its practicality for real-world constraint-driven design. A modified conditional variational autoencoder (VAE) with a loss of the forward model is introduced in [20]. Although it helps ensure the desired electromagnetic response, it essentially collapses the multi-modal inverse problem into a deterministic search and does not explicitly model the posterior distribution of geomet-ric parameters, limiting solution-space diversity. RF inductive element synthesis methods have explored template-free layout generation, physics-augmented neural modeling, and multi-template transformer synthesis [21]–[23]. These methods improve structural flexibility or modeling accuracy, but practical mmWave passive synthesis must also handle different levels of design objectives. Some tasks are directly described by device level quantities, including induc-tance L, quality factor Q, coupling coefficient k, self reso-nance frequency SRF , and maximum available gain Gmax ,whereas the design of the matching network is defined by circuit level responses such as S11 , S21 , bandwidth, and impedance transformation. In this work, circuit level objectives are handled through a hierarchical route, where network level specifications are first translated into intermediate device level requirements, and the resulting layout seed is then refined by circuit level post optimization. In this work, a hybrid forward optimization and reverse de-sign (HFORD) method is proposed for synthesizing mmWave on-chip inductive elements. The proposed method organizes passive synthesis as a target-to-layout flow. Device level requirements are directly processed by the HFORD core, while circuit level specifications are first translated into inter-mediate device level requirements through a task-dependent initialization step. The HFORD core combines random-forest-based topology selection, VAE-based spectral feature gener-ation, MDN-based probabilistic inverse mapping, and PSO-based latent space optimization to obtain a layout level initial solution. For complex circuit level tasks, the initial solution can be further refined by a task-dependent post optimization procedure. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows: 1) A hierarchical HFORD method for synthesizing mmWave on-chip inductive elements that unifies device and circuit-level specifications while separating target translation, reusable HFORD core generation, and circuit optimization for versatile passive synthesis. 2) A performance-aware dataset construction method us-ing sparse-fitting sampling that reduces full-wave EM simulation costs. Expanding data in the performance space improves the boundary region coverage essential for inverse design. 3) A physics-informed parametric modeling strategy for transformers that compresses high-dimensional broad-band electrical responses into low-dimensional features without losing critical physical signatures like resonance and high-frequency saturation. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the problem formulation. Section III details the proposed methodology, including the sparse-fitting sampling strategy for efficient dataset construction and the hybrid op-timization flow. Section IV provides two practical examples of inductive elements that are used to verify the proposed HFORD method in Section III. Section V concludes this paper. II. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

The passive synthesis tasks in this work are specified at either the device or circuit level. The former is described by inductive element characteristics, while the latter is defined by network level responses. Direct optimization of circuit level objectives over layout variables usually leads to a large and strongly coupled search space due to layout parasitics, loading effects, and topology dependent EM behavior. Therefore, circuit level specifications are first translated into intermediate device level requirements through task-dependent initialization, analytical estimation, or schematic level optimization. Both types of tasks are then unified as a target-to-layout synthesis problem, which is con-ventionally formulated as 

min  

> x

J(x, y(x, f )) 

s.t. helec (y(x, f )) ≤ 0, gdrc (x) ≤ 0,

x ∈ [xlb , xub ],

(1) where x ∈ RN collects the tunable geometric variables, 

y(x, f ) ∈ Y is the EM response taking values in the response space Y ⊆ RC×T with C port channels and T frequency points, and helec , gdrc encode electrical and process constraints. Equation (1) implicitly assumes a fixed topology, a defined inverse map, and a faithful surrogate model. However, these assumptions generally break down at mmWave frequencies, as summarized in Fig. 1, leading to three coupled ill-posed sub-problems. 

A. Topology Selection Problem 

Let T = {T1, . . . , T K } be a library of admissible topolo-gies. Each topology induces its own geometric space Ω(k)

> phy

, the feasible region of the DRC Ω(k) 

> drc

, and the forward EM operator 

fk : Ω (k) 

> phy

→ Y . For a target ¯y, the optimal topology is 

¯T = arg max   

> Tk∈T

max   

> x∈Ω(k)
> phy ∩Ω(k)
> drc

− fk(x) − ¯y , (2) SONG et al. : HFORD: HYBRID FORWARD OPTIMIZATION AND REVERSE DESIGN METHOD FOR ON-CHIP MMWAVE INDUCTIVE ELEMENTS 3 

> Fig. 1. The core problem of inverse design.

which requires solving one inverse problem for each candidate topology. To reduce bias from manual topology selection, HFORD replaces (2) with a learned selector C : ¯ y 7 → Tk that approximates ¯T in a single inference. 

B. Inverse Non-uniqueness and Mode Collapse 

Once Tk is fixed, the forward operator fk is generically non-unique, so the image is a disconnected and multi-modal set that is given by 

¯X(¯ y) = x ∈ Ω(k) 

> phy

∩ Ω(k) 

> drc

fk(x) = ¯ y . (3) Any deterministic regressor gθ : y 7 → x trained in MSE converges to the conditional mean 

¯gθ (¯ y) = E[x | ¯y] , (4) which may lie between feasible modes rather than on valid solutions. As shown in Fig. 1, this averaged estimate can enter DRC forbidden regions, such as non-integer turns or submin-imum line widths. The inverse task is therefore formulated as conditional density estimation with feasibility-aware mode selection, i.e., 

¯x ∈ arg max     

> x∈Ω(k)
> phy ∩Ω(k)
> drc

p(x | ¯y). (5) 

C. Optimization Illusion under Distributional Extrapolation 

The third pathology occurs after the surrogate-based opti-mizer has converged successfully. Let ˆfθ be a surrogate trained in D = {(xi, yi)}Mi=1 ∼ pD , and let f be the ground truth solver. A typical loop returns 

ˆx = arg min  

> x

J  ˆfθ (x), ¯y,

s.t. J  ˆfθ (ˆ x), ¯y ≈ 0.

(6) However, EM verification gives J(f (ˆ x), ¯y) ≫ 0 even with good held-out accuracy. This discrepancy is referred to here as the optimization illusion. It occurs when a global search minimizes the surrogate objective outside of the training support, especially near performance frontiers. Generative surrogates further aggravate this issue. When latent optimization leaves the learned response manifold ˆMθ ⊂Y, the decoder may still produce smooth but physically unrealizable spectra, such that ˆMθ̸ = Mf = f (Ω phy ). As shown at the bottom of Fig. 1, the predicted and simulated 

Q(f ) curves have similar shapes, while the constrained peak is shifted enough to miss the target. III. HFORD M ETHOD 

This section introduces the proposed HFORD method, in-cluding response parameterization, dataset construction, offline model training, layout seed generation, and task-dependent post optimization. 

A. Offline and Online Hybrid Architecture 

The proposed HFORD method is organized as a hierarchical synthesis flow for mmWave on-chip inductive elements, as shown in Fig. 2. It consists of offline model library construc-tion, online layout seed generation through the HFORD core, and task-dependent circuit level post optimization. The offline stage is completed before deployment and constructs reusable models. These models support online synthesis but do not enter the optimization loop for each new task. With the offline library prepared, the online synthesis stage starts with a new design objective. For device level synthesis, the requirements are directly specified by inductive element quantities such as L, Q, k, Gmax , and DRC constraints. For circuit level synthesis, network level specifications such as S11 , S21 , input impedance, bandwidth, and insertion loss are first converted into intermediate device level requirements through task-dependent target translation, analytical modeling, schematic level optimization, or prior circuit knowledge. After this conversion, both types of tasks share a common device level requirement interface. The HFORD core maps the unified device level require-ments to a layout level seed. It selects a suitable topology, loads the corresponding pre-trained models, and performs layout seed generation in a continuous latent space. In this space, the candidate spectral features, the probabilistic inverse mapping results, and the constraints related to the DRC are jointly evaluated. The optimized latent variable is then con-verted into physical geometry parameters, producing an initial solution with the selected topology and device dimensions. For device level synthesis, the generated seed can be verified by full-wave EM simulations and used as the final inductive element layout if the targets are satisfied. For circuit level synthesis, the same seed serves as a meaningful starting point for task-dependent post optimization, where the final objective is evaluated by complete field-circuit co-simulation rather than isolated device level characteristics. Therefore, the proposed method separates offline model preparation, online seed generation, and task-dependent cir-cuit level refinement. This modular organization allows the HFORD core to be reused in different passive synthesis tasks 4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS  

> Fig. 2. Flowchart of the HFORD method.

without being tied to a particular matching theory, compensa-tion strategy, or circuit topology. 

B. Physics-Aware Parametric Modeling 

The accurate design of mmWave on-chip inductive ele-ments requires full-band EM response modeling rather than single frequency predictions. However, directly using dense frequency samples as learning targets results in a high-dimensional output space, where small shifts in resonant frequency or quality factor peaks may cause large numerical errors despite similar physical trends. For on-chip inductors, previous work [24] has shown that complex responses can be represented by key physical land-marks, providing a compact basis for the inductor examples in this work. Direct black-box compression may lose important features such as resonance location, peak sharpness, high-frequency saturation, and coupling. To address this issue, a physics-informed parametric modeling strategy is introduced for transformer response representation. The broadband responses 

L(f ), Q(f ), M (f ), and Re {Z21 } are expressed by analytical fitting formulas, transforming dense frequency samples into compact features with physical meanings. This representation reduces learning dimensionality while preserving the reso-nance, loss, and coupling signatures. First, L(f ) is modeled to capture low-frequency stability and a steep slope near the SRF as 

L(f ) = − λ1

(f − fr, 1) + δ1 

> f−fr, 1

− λ2

(f − fr, 2) + δ2 

> f−fr, 2

+ Ldc ,

(7) where Ldc denotes the baseline L, and the summation terms ac-count for dynamic deviations from the primary and secondary self resonances. Here, λi quantifies the resonant strength, fr,i 

the pole frequency, and δi a shape factor that regulates the trajectory of the pole. Similarly, the positive region of Q(f ) is fitted with a distinct function that captures its peak magnitude and location 

Q(f ) = eQmax 1 sin 

 πf eFQmax1 

eF eFQmax1 

> SRF1



> eQsharp1

+ eQmax 2 sin π(f − Fset ) eFQmax2 

( eFSRF2 − Fset ) eFQmax2 

! eQsharp2 

,

(8) where eQmax represents the peak Q, eFQmax controls the peak frequency, and eQsharp determines the peak sharpness. eFSRF 

denotes the pole frequency, and Fset denotes the valley fre-quency between the two fitted Q peaks. To separately capture magnetic energy storage and dissipa-tion, the Z21 is decomposed into its real part Re {Z21 } and the effective mutual inductance M (f ), both of which must be modeled to reconstruct k(f ).First, Re {Z21 } captures AC loss dominated by skin effects and substrate coupling, modeled by a resonance-like rational function 

Re {Z21 (f )} = αZ f βZ

(f − fc)2 + γZ

, (9) where αZ is the magnitude scaling factor, fc the center frequency of the resistive loss peak, βZ the peak sharpness, and γZ the bandwidth and damping of the loss profile. SONG et al. : HFORD: HYBRID FORWARD OPTIMIZATION AND REVERSE DESIGN METHOD FOR ON-CHIP MMWAVE INDUCTIVE ELEMENTS 5             

> TABLE I ERRORS OF FITTING RESULTS
> Structure Interleaved Symmetrical
> NRMSE {L}1.72% 0.95%
> NRMSE {Q}2.24% 1.09%
> NRMSE {M}0.51% 0.53%
> NRMSE {Zre }1.26% 1.12%

Second, the effective mutual inductance M (f ) deviates from its static value due to distributed capacitive parasitics, modeled by a composite function with DC bias and resonant terms 

M (f ) = − η1

(f − fm, 1) + ζ1 

> f−fm, 1

− η2

(f − fm, 2) + ζ2 

> f−fm, 2

+ Mdc ,

(10) 

where Mdc is the baseline mutual inductance, and the sum-mation terms capture dynamic deviations from the primary and secondary resonant perturbations. Here, ηi quantifies the resonant strength of M (f ), fm,i denotes the corresponding pole frequency, and ζi regulates the pole trajectory. The proposed method is validated on 1,000 simulated trans-former samples using EMX. As shown in Table I, the fitted re-sponses agree well with the EM data across the mmWave band and capture both low-frequency stability and near-resonance variations. The fitted coefficients form a compact physical feature vector, which is used as the conditional input of the probabilistic inverse mapper. 

C. Performance-Aware Dataset Construction 

In the design of mmWave on-chip inductive elements, a single device category often spans a large design space, and exhaustive EM sampling becomes computationally expensive. Conventional samplers such as Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) [25] and Monte Carlo methods [26] generate geometric parameters x ∈ X under predefined distributions. However, the nonlinear geometry-to-physics mapping makes the resulting performance samples y ∈ Y unevenly distributed, often clustered near common response regions while missing boundary regions. To improve coverage of the performance space, an adaptive sparse fitting sampling strategy was adopted. As described in Algorithm 1, an initial dataset D is first generated by LHS and then expanded using a maximin criterion in the performance space. Each new sample is selected as 

x∗ = arg max 

> x∈X



min    

> (xk,yk)∈D

∥ ˆf (x) − yk∥2



, (11) where ˆf (·) denotes the surrogate model trained on the avail-able samples. The selected candidates are then evaluated again by EM simulation before being added to D, which ensures that all labels in the database are obtained from EM simulation. Since this objective is nonconvex and contains multiple sparse regions, the Niching migratory multi-swarm optimizer (NMMSO) [27] is used to identify various candidate geometries in one run. In experiments, a 1:1 ratio is maintained between samples from the initial random sampling and those from the pro-posed adaptive optimization. This hybrid composition allows 

Algorithm 1 Performance-Aware Adaptive Sampling 

Input: Geometric Sampling Boundary X , Initial dataset size 

Ninit , Target Dataset Size Ntarget 

Output: Dataset D = {(xi, y i)}Ntarget  

> i=1
> 1:

Step 1: Initialization  

> 2:

Initialize dataset D with Ninit samples using LHS  

> 3:

Evaluate performance yi = f (xi) for all initial samples  

> 4:

Step 2: Adaptive Expansion Loop  

> 5:

while |D| < N target do  

> 6:

// Define the objective: Maximize distance to the nearest neighbor in Y-space  

> 7:

Define Objective Function J(x): 

> 8:

J(x) = min (xk ,y k )∈D ∥ ˆf (x) − yk∥2 

> 9:

Use NMMSO to find diverse candidates in X-space that maximize J(x)  

> 10:

NMMSO returns a set of local optima (candidates)  

> 11:

Xcandidates ← NMMSO (arg max x∈X J(x))  

> 12:

for each xcand in Xcandidates do  

> 13:

if |D| < N target then  

> 14:

Evaluate ycand = f (xcand ) 

> 15:

D ← D ∪ { (xcand , y cand )} 

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

end while  

> 19:

return D

the model to retain global statistical coverage from random sampling while gaining boundary precision from the adaptive phase. This sampling strategy introduces additional computa-tional overhead from the optimization loop in each iteration. When the EM simulations themselves are costly, this trade-off becomes justifiable. By selecting the most informative sam-ples, our method reduces the redundant simulations required for target accuracy and improves data generation efficiency. In addition to improving sample placement within a given topology, the efficient construction of a multiple topology model library also requires reducing the data burden across related structures. Although different topologies have different geometric ranges and response distributions, they share com-mon EM mechanisms. Therefore, transfer learning is used to reuse spectral features learned from a source domain DS for a related target domain DT .The transfer process comprises source pre-training, param-eter transfer, and fine-tuning. A baseline model is first trained on a representative structure, and its optimized weights θS are then used to initialize the target model. The target model is finally fine-tuned using a small dataset, approximately 20% of the source dataset, to adapt the mapping to the new topology. This strategy improves sample efficiency and enables rapid expansion of the offline component library without exhaustive EM simulations for every topology. Quadrilateral and octagonal inductors in single-ended, sym-metrical, and stacked configurations are evaluated. Using the single-ended and stacked quadrilateral inductors as base tem-plates, parameter-transfer training is applied to the remaining types. The training comparison results are shown in Table II. 6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS                                        

> TABLE II TRAINING RESULTS OF MODELS FOR ALL INDUCTOR TYPES .Structure Dataset NRMSE1 NRMSE2 Se-N-4 5000 3.6% Se-N-8 1000 4.8% 19.4% S-N-4 1000 8.2% 15.9% S-N-8 1000 9.9% 17.5% Se-O-4 5000 6.5% Se-O-8 1000 9.3% 23.1% S-O-4 1000 11.3% 21.7% S-O-8 1000 9.7% 18.6% NRMSE1 obtained with the transfer learning model. NRMSE2 obtained without transfer learning under the same data volume. Se/S denote single-ended/differential, N/O de-note normal/overlapped, and 4/8 denote quadrilat-eral/octagonal layouts.

D. Offline Model Training 

After dataset construction and response parameterization, the offline stage trains the reusable models required by the online HFORD core. For each topology, compact spectral features and geometric parameters are used to train the VAE-based spectral generator and the MDN-based probabilistic inverse mapper. A random forest selector is also trained across the device library to identify a suitable topology for each target requirement. Together, these pre-trained models form the offline model library for subsequent layout seed generation. 

1) Automated Device Type Selection: 

Given a target requirement vector, the first step of the online HFORD core is to select a suitable topology from the offline model library. This selection avoids searches in unsuitable design spaces and determines which VAE and MDN models are loaded for layout seed generation. In this work, a random-forest-based classifier is employed for automated device type selection. Let T = {T1, T 2, . . . , T K } denote the candidate topology library, and let r denote the target requirement vector, which includes LW F , QW F , working frequency ( W F ), SRF , k,or Gmax depending on the device type. A random forest consists of Nt decision trees trained with bootstrap resampling and random feature selection [28]. Each decision tree outputs a candidate topology label hi(r) ∈ T . The final selected topology is determined by majority voting as 

C(r) = arg max  

> Tk∈T
> Nt

X

> i=1

I (hi(r) = Tk) , (12) where C(r) is the selected topology and I(·) is the indicator function. The selected topology is then used to load the corre-sponding VAE and MDN models for latent space optimization. 

2) Generative Modeling of Spectral Features: 

The VAE [29] is used to learn a compact and continuous latent representation z from the high-dimensional EM response 

y ∈ RC×T . The encoder maps the multi-channel spectral re-sponse y into a latent feature z, while the decoder reconstructs the corresponding response ˆy. This continuous latent space allows small perturbations in z to produce smooth variations 0 50 100 150 200                                  

> −3.0
> −1.5
> 0.0
> 1.5
> 3.0
> −9
> 0
> 9
> 18
> 27
> Q
> L (nH)
> Frequency (GHz)
> Simulated L
> Predicted L
> Simulated Q
> Predicted Q
> (a) 025 50 75 100
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> NRMSE (%)
> Epoch
> VAE
> AE
> PCA (b) Fig. 3. Comparison between the simulated ground truth and the reconstructed curves predicted by the proposed VAE model. (a) Land Qreconstruction; (b) PCA, AE, and VAE. TABLE III COMPARISONS OF THE VAE WITH THE PCA AND THE AE Item PCA AE VAE Output dimension 10 66Model training time (s) 1.2 38.5 46.1 Prediction time ( μs) 21 11 10 Mean NRMSE (%) 1.65 0.51 0.35

in the reconstructed EM response, which facilitates subsequent latent space optimization. Standard VAEs usually assume independent Gaussian like-lihoods and therefore ignore correlations among different S-parameters and adjacent frequency points. To include these dependencies, the decoder likelihood is modeled with aKronecker-structured covariance [30]. Let ˜y = vec( y) ∈

RCT denote the vectorized EM response, and let μθ (z) = vec(ˆ yθ (z)) denote the decoder mean. The likelihood is written as 

pθ (˜ y|z) = N (˜ y; μθ (z), Σc ⊗ Σf ) , (13) where Σc ∈ RC×C captures coupling among different chan-nels and Σf ∈ RT ×T models smoothness across frequency points. This structure encourages physically consistent spec-tral reconstruction instead of treating all frequency samples independently. The encoder qϕ(z|y) uses 1D convolutional layers and fully connected layers to parameterize the latent mean and variance, while the decoder reconstructs the full spectral response. The model is trained by maximizing the evidence lower bound, i.e., 

L(θ, ϕ ; y) = Eqϕ(z|y)[log pθ (y|z)] − DKL 

 qϕ(z|y)∥p(z),

(14) where p(z) = N (0, I).After training, the proposed VAE is compared with principal component analysis (PCA) and a standard autoencoder (AE). As shown in Fig. 3(a), the reconstructed L and Q curves agree well with the simulated EM results. Fig. 3(b) and Table III further show that the VAE achieves the lowest mean NRMSE of 0.35% with an output dimension of 6 and an online prediction time of 1.0 × 10 −5 s. Although the VAE requires a slightly longer offline training time, its online inference cost remains negligible for the proposed method. SONG et al. : HFORD: HYBRID FORWARD OPTIMIZATION AND REVERSE DESIGN METHOD FOR ON-CHIP MMWAVE INDUCTIVE ELEMENTS 70 20 40 60 80               

> −6
> −3
> 0
> 3
> 6
> −20
> −10
> 0
> 10
> 20
> Q
> L (nH)
> Frequency (GHz)
> Simulated L
> Predicted L
> Simulated Q
> Predicted Q
> (a) 0123456
> ×10 −2
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> MSE of generated EM response (b) Fig. 4. Comparison between MDN prediction and the original data. (a) L
> and Q; (b) MSE.

3) Probabilistic Inverse Mapping: 

The VAE decoder maps the latent space Z to the spectral space Y, while design automation requires the inverse retrieval of geometric parameters x from a desired response. Since mul-tiple geometries may satisfy the same spectral specification, a deterministic regressor trained with MSE tends to predict an averaged solution that may be physically invalid. To model this one-to-many mapping, an MDN [31] is used to predict the conditional distribution of geometric parameters p(x|z) from the VAE encode latent feature z.In standard MDN implementations, exponential activation is often used to enforce positive variance, but exp( ai) may cause overflow or variance collapse when the unconstrained output 

ai becomes too large or too negative. To improve numerical stability, the standard deviation is predicted using a softplus activation, 

σi = ln(1 + exp( ai)) + ϵ, (15) where ai is the output of the unconstrained network and 

ϵ is a small positive constant. As shown in Table IV, this modification improves convergence stability. The standard exponential formulation converged in only 3 out of 10 trials, while the softplus formulation achieved a 100% success rate with faster convergence in the deep training stage. 

E. HFORD Core for Layout Level Initial Solution Generation 

The HFORD core performs online layout level initial solu-tion generation based on the unified device level requirements, as illustrated in Fig. 2. It integrates topology selection, VAE-based spectral generation, MDN-based probabilistic inverse mapping, and PSO-based latent space optimization. Instead of directly searching in the physical geometry space, which is often discontinuous due to topology dependent variables and DRC constraints, the HFORD core conducts the main optimization in the continuous latent space Z.First, the workflow is initialized with the input target per-formance metrics of the passive device and the corresponding fabrication constraints. A pre-trained random forest classifier first selects the most suitable device topology according to the input targets and process limits. The pre-trained forward and inverse neural network models corresponding to the se-lected structure are then loaded. This step avoids unnecessary searches in unsuitable design spaces.                  

> TABLE IV COMPARISONS OF THE MODIFIED MDN WITH THE MDN AND THE MLP Item MLP MDN Soft MDN Model training time (s) 167.8 107.6 146.1 Prediction time ( μs) 22 21 21 Re-simulation RMSE (%) 12.9 4.1 2.7

Next, in the global optimization phase, the algorithm it-eratively explores the continuous latent space Z to find the optimal design. During each iteration, the latent variables are input to the forward surrogate model of the VAE decoder. This rapidly predicts the corresponding EM responses, bypassing the need for expensive EM simulations. Concurrently, to account for physical realizability under given process constraints, the generated responses are first converted into compact physical features by the physics-aware parametric model, and the MDN then estimates the conditional distribution of feasible physical dimensions. A joint fitness function is then constructed. It not only measures the deviation between predicted responses and target metrics but also applies a physical penalty if the inferred geometric parameters exceed permissible boundaries or show low confidence probabilities. Guided by this combined fitness score, the PSO algorithm systematically updates the latent variables until convergence is reached. Finally, the optimized latent variables are mapped back to the geometric space to extract the physical layout parameters. Subsequently, an EM simulation is conducted to verify the actual performance of the generated structure. If this verifica-tion fails, the latent space optimization is either restarted or subjected to further fine-tuning. Otherwise, the verified design is adopted as the initial layout level solution. 

F. Task-Dependent circuit level post optimization 

As described in the HFORD architecture, the HFORD core maps unified device level requirements to a layout level seed. For complex circuit level tasks, this seed is not necessarily the final design but provides a physically feasible starting point for subsequent optimization, where the objective is defined by network level responses rather than isolated device level characteristics. Let x0 denote the layout seed generated by the HFORD core. Starting from x0, the post optimization adjusts the passive layout parameters x and task-specific auxiliary vari-ables a according to the final circuit level specifications. The network level response evaluated by field-circuit co-simulation is denoted as csim (x, a). The post optimization is formulated as 

min   

> x,a

Jc(x, a) = Lc (csim (x, a), c⋆)+ λ ∥x − x0∥22 + αΦDRC (x),

(16) where c⋆ denotes the target circuit level specification, and 

Lc(·) measures the mismatch between the simulated and desired network level responses. The second term keeps the search close to the generated seed within a physically mean-ingful neighborhood, while ΦDRC (x) penalizes process and 8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS Doutw  

> Douth
> Dinw
> Dinh
> Wmax
> Wmin
> S
> Input Output
> Via
> Via
> (a)

0 30 60 90 120 150 

−3.0 

−1.5 

0.0 

1.5 

3.0 

−30 

−20 

−10 

0

10 

20 

30 

> Q
> L (nH)

Frequency (GHz) 

Simulated L

Predicted L

Simulated Q

Predicted Q (b) 0 3 6 9 12 15 

0

7

14 

21 

28 

> Fitness

Iteration 

HFORD 

OSIAS 

COA 

GA (c) Fig. 5. (a) The structure of a compressed symmetrical inductor and its geometrical parameters; (b) comparison between predicted and simulated L, Q                                                                    

> responses; (c) convergence curves of different optimization methods. TABLE V COMPARISONS OF THE PROPOSED HFORD WITH THE GA, THE COA AND THE OSIAS WHEN MAXIMIZING THE QUALITY FACTOR
> Algorithm Wmax (μm) S(μm) Wmin (μm) NDinw (μm) γL50GHz (nH) Q50GHz Q100GHz t(h) GA 7.82 2.06 3.07 249.07 0.81 0.31 24.88 1.89 29.26 COA [32] 6.61 2.99 5.38 242.15 0.99 0.30 27.25 5.78 15.74 OSIAS [24] 6.76 2.71 5.26 248.26 0.75 0.29 27.67 6.84 0.82 HFORD 6.12 2.99 6.11 242.92 0.99 0.29 27.54 8.18 0.03

layout violations. The weights λ and α balance the circuit objective, seed preservation, and manufacturability. The form of Lc depends on the application and may include impedance matching, insertion loss, bandwidth, gain, phase balance, or in-band ripple. Therefore, this stage is kept as a task-dependent interface that can use different objective functions, auxiliary variables, and simulation flows. It avoids an unconstrained global search after seed generation and preserves the EM consistency inherited from the HFORD core. This separation allows the HFORD core to remain reusable across passive synthesis tasks without being tied to a specific matching theory, compensation strategy, or circuit topology. IV. D ESIGN EXAMPLES 

In this section, two mmWave on-chip inductive-element examples are used to validate the proposed HFORD method. The inductor example verifies device level synthesis, while the transformer example covers both device level performance optimization and circuit level impedance matching. 

A. Application to Millimeter-Wave On-chip Inductor 

Conventional on-chip inductor design relies on designer experience, surrogate modeling, and repeated EM verification because the geometric parameters are strongly coupled with L,

Q, and SRF constraints. This example evaluates the proposed HFORD core for device level synthesis, where inductive element requirements are directly mapped to physical layouts. For a given target, the random forest selector first identifies a suitable inductor type, and the corresponding VAE and MDN models are then loaded for latent space layout generation under fabrication and DRC constraints. In greater detail, the inductors are fabricated in a 40-nm RF CMOS process with 3.4-μm and 0.9-μm metal layers, and                 

> TABLE VI RANGES OF VALUES FOR SAMPLES
> Parameter Value range Line width ( μm)1.5∼10
> Line space ( μm)1.5∼5
> Maximum area ( μm2)100 ×100 Number of turns 1∼5
> Deformation ratio 0.1∼3.0

the algorithm runs on a server with two AMD EPYC 7F52 processors and 512 GB of memory. A total of 5,000 inductor samples are used for training, and their geometric ranges are listed in Table VI. For the EMX simulations, the scanning range is set to [ 0, 200 ] GHz with a step size of 1 GHz, while the edge mesh is configured to 0.1 μm, guaranteeing accuracy and efficiency. The inverse model is implemented in PyTorch. After EM simulation, the values L and Q from 1 to 200 GHz are ex-tracted. The network takes the frequency and the correspond-ing L/Q values as inputs and outputs six design variables. The dataset is divided into training and test sets in an 8:2 ratio. A two-layer network with 200 nodes per layer and Tanh activation is trained for 1,000 iterations, with the number of Gaussian mixtures set to m = 5 .The quality factor is one of the most critical parameters of an inductor and is closely related to the loss. The higher 

Q indicates the better performance of inductor. For example, when designing an octagonal symmetrical deformable spiral inductor with Ftarget = 50 GHz , Ltarget = 0 .3 nH , and 

SRF > 100 GHz , to maximize Q, the problem that must SONG et al. : HFORD: HYBRID FORWARD OPTIMIZATION AND REVERSE DESIGN METHOD FOR ON-CHIP MMWAVE INDUCTIVE ELEMENTS 9W

> Via
> Via S
> Din

(a) 0 25 50 75 100 

−3.0 

−1.5 

0.0 

1.5 

3.0 

> Lp (nH)

Frequency (GHz) 

Simulated 

Predicted (b) 0 25 50 75 100 

−27 

−18 

−9 

0

9

> Qp

Frequency (GHz) 

Simulated 

Predicted (c) 0 25 50 75 100 

−3.0 

−1.5 

0.0 

1.5 

3.0 

> Ls (nH)

Frequency (GHz) 

Simulated 

Predicted (d) 0 25 50 75 100 

−15 

−10 

−5 

0

5

10 

15 

> Qs

Frequency (GHz) 

Simulated 

Predicted 

(e) 0 10 20 30 40 50  

> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> k
> Frequency (GHz)
> Simulated
> Predicted

(f) 0 25 50 75 100  

> −50
> −40
> −30
> −20
> −10
> 0
> IL  (dB)
> Frequency (GHz)
> Simulated
> Predicted

(g) 0 25 50 75 100  

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Gmax
> Frequency (GHz)
> Simulated
> Predicted

(h) Fig. 6. Performance prediction results of the on-chip transformer. (a) Symmetrically overlapped octagonal transformer; (b) Lp; (c) Qp; (d) Ls; (e) Qs; (f) 

k; (g) IL ; (h) Gmax .TABLE VII COMPARISONS OF THE PROPOSED HFORD WITH THE GA, THE COA AND THE MLAO WHEN MAXIMIZING GAIN 

Algorithm W (μm) S (μm) N Dinw (μm) k Q28GHz Gmax t (h) GA 3.68 1.54 1 121.78 0.70 11.68 0.79 42.34 COA [32] 3.94 2.06 1 139.82 0.69 11.97 0.70 27.63 MLAO [7] 2.46 1.65 1 143.01 0.70 11.74 0.80 9.12 HFORD 2.39 1.51 1 141.22 0.70 11.74 0.79 0.04 

be solved is 

max( Q50GHz )s.t. geometrical constraints , 

> |LWF −LWF ±5GHz |
> LWF

< 0.05 , 

> |L50GHz −Ltarget |
> Ltarget

< 0.05 ,

SRF > 100 GHz ,

(17) where L50GHz and Q50GHz are the predicted values used during the optimization of the latent space, and Ltarget is the input. For this objective, the automatic selector chooses the oc-tagonal symmetrical inductor. The generated layout satisfies the physical dimensions and DRC constraints. The predicted responses are compared with the EM simulation results in Fig. 5, and the detailed metrics and optimization time are summarized in Table V. Compared with previous optimization schemes under the same targets, HFORD achieves comparable performance with a much shorter optimization time. 

B. Application to Millimeter-Wave On-chip Transformer 

Compared with on-chip inductors, on-chip transformers have stronger coupling effects, more degrees of design free-dom, and more response quantities, which make their mod-

TABLE VIII RANGES OF VALUES FOR SAMPLES 

Parameter Value range Line width ( μm) 2.2 ∼ 10 

Line space ( μm) 1.5 ∼ 10 

Maximum area ( μm2) 200 ×200 Number of turns 1 ∼ 3

Deformation ratio 0.1 ∼ 1.0

Center offset 0.1 ∼ 0.5

eling and inverse design more challenging. To reduce the re-sponse dimensionality, the physics-based extraction described in Section III-B is used to maintain compactness and accu-racy while preserving the dominant coupling and resonance characteristics. The transformers are fabricated in the same 40-nm RF CMOS process and evaluated using the same computing platform. A total of 10,000 transformer samples are used for training, and their geometric ranges are listed in Table VIII. EMX simulations are performed from 0 to 100 GHz with a 0.1 GHz step, while the edge mesh is set to 0.1 μm. Based on the simulated Z-parameters and S-parameters, Lp,

Ls, Qp, Qs, M , and Re (Z21 ) are extracted. During training, the target frequency and the corresponding EM response 10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS Ws

Via Dp

Dc

Ds

Wp

S

> (a)

0 15 30 45 60 

−32 

−24 

−16 

−8 

0

> Magnitude (dB)

Frequency (GHz) 

|S21 | before tuning 

|S21 | after tuning 

|S11 | before tuning 

|S11 | after tuning (b) 0 5 10 15 20 

−4000 

−3200 

−2400 

−1600 

−800 

> Fitness Function

Iteration 

MB-MLAO with seed 

MB-MLAO 

GA COA (c) Fig. 7. Impedance-matching design results. (a) 1:2 Symmetrically overlapped transformer; (b) S-parameter before and after tuning; (c) Fitness convergence comparison of different optimization methods. 

matrix are used as input, while the output consists of six transformer geometry parameters. The dataset is divided into training and test sets in an 8:2 ratio. The model uses two hidden layers with 200 nodes per layer and Tanh activation and is trained for 2,000 iterations with m = 5 .C1 C2        

> L1L2
> kZin
> (a) 0.2 0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0
> -0.2j
> 0.2j
> -0.5j
> 0.5j
> -1.0j
> 1.0j
> -2.0j
> 2.0j
> -5.0j
> 5.0j
> 23 GHz
> 33 GHz (b) Fig. 8. Broadband input matching using the coupled-resonator model. (a) Equivalent circuit. (b) Input impedance trajectory on the Smith chart.

The transformer library covers quadrilateral and octagonal geometries, interleaved and stacked configurations, and both equal-turn and unequal-turn designs. The quadrilateral inter-leaved and quadrilateral stacked transformers are selected as base templates, and parameter-transfer training is applied to the remaining transformer types. Two transformer design scenarios are considered. The first evaluates device level performance optimization by maxi-mizing Gmax of a transformer. The second evaluates circuit level impedance matching, where the HFORD-generated trans-former seed is refined through task-dependent post optimiza-tion. The overall workflow is shown in Fig. 2. 

1) Available Gain Maximization: 

In mmWave receiver front-ends, the transformer strongly affects signal transmission efficiency. For this application, a differentially stacked topology is selected to exploit the vertical magnetic coupling between the top and lower metal layers. Although this structure may reduce SRF due to the increased inter-winding capacitance, the optimization flow balances this trade-off to maximize Gmax at the operating frequency. The objective is to maximize Gmax at 28 GHz under physical design rules and bandwidth constraints, which is formulated as 

max  

> x

Gmax (x) f =28 GHz 

s.t. geometrical constraints , 

> |LWF −LWF ±5GHz |
> LWF

< 0.05 , 

> |L28GHz −Ltarget |
> Ltarget

< 0.05 ,

SRF ≥ 45 GHz , x ∈ Ωdrc 

(18) As shown in Fig. 6 and Table VII, the generated de-sign satisfies the specifications and shows good agreement between the predicted and simulated responses. Compared with conventional optimization methods, HFORD achieves similar performance with a much shorter optimization time, demonstrating its effectiveness for device level transformer gain optimization under physical and DRC constraints. 

2) Impedance Matching: 

For the input matching network of a power amplifier, broad-band impedance matching and in-band transmission flatness are required to drive the subsequent circuit stage. A stacked 1:2 transformer topology is adopted because it provides high k

and additional geometrical freedom for broadband impedance transformation. The synthesis follows the task-dependent post optimization flow in Section III-F. As illustrated in Fig. 8, analytical optimization based on magnetic coupling resonance is first used to estimate the initial lumped parameters, including L,

k, and compensation capacitance C. Based on these electrical targets, the HFORD core generates an initial transformer seed through latent space optimization. Since layout parasitics cannot be fully captured by fixed L and k, the seed is further refined by field-circuit co-simulation, including transformer geometry adjustments and compensation capacitor tuning for 

Cp and Cs.The objective is to match a 50 Ω source to the input impedance of the subsequent encapsulated circuit stage, which is characterized by an imported .SNP file shown in Fig. 8. Let ZS = 50 Ω denote the source impedance and ZL(f )

denote the load impedance extracted from the .SNP file. Over SONG et al. : HFORD: HYBRID FORWARD OPTIMIZATION AND REVERSE DESIGN METHOD FOR ON-CHIP MMWAVE INDUCTIVE ELEMENTS 11 

TABLE IX PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS OF THE PROPOSED HFORD M ETHOD AND THOSE IN REFERENCES 

Reference Application Auto Topology Selection Reported Model Error Synthesis Time Response Dimension Illusion Mitigation This work Inductor Yes MAE < 0.04 2 min 6-D Yes Transformer Yes MAE < 0.06 3 min 40-D Yes [22] Transformer N.A. MAE < 0.06 3–9 min 12 ×300 Partial [23] Transformer No MAE < 0.01 <3 min 2400-D Partial [33] Transformer No MSE < 3.03 ×10 −5 10 min 100 ×8 No N.A. denotes not applicable because the method is template-free rather than topology-selection based. Model Dimension denotes the reported neural-network response dimension. The model errors are reported following the metrics used in the corresponding references. Since different works evaluate different response quantities and use different error definitions, these values are intended to indicate the reported modeling accuracy within each work rather than a strictly normalized cross-paper comparison. 

the target band 23 GHz ≤ f ≤ 33 GHz, the design task is formulated as 

max  

> x

|S21 | − λ ∆|S21 |

s.t. |S11 | ≤ − 7 dB ,

|S21 | ≥ − 2 dB ,

x ∈ Ωdrc ,

(19) where |S21 | denotes the in-band mean of |S21 | in the target band, and ∆|S21 | is defined as the difference between the maximum and minimum values of |S21 | within the band. The coefficient λ > 0 is a weighting factor that trades off mean transmission against flatness, and Ωdrc denotes the feasible set imposed by the geometric constraints. The optimization results are shown in Fig. 7. Compared with the baselines, the proposed flow provides a more effective initialization for circuit level refinement, leading to improved agreement between the predicted seed behavior and the final field-circuit co-simulation results. A qualitative comparison with recent reverse design methods is summarized in Table IX. The proposed HFORD delivers exceptional accuracy while requiring the least computational time. Additionally, it suc-cessfully eliminates the adverse illusory effects that have long plagued existing synthesis approaches. V. C ONCLUSION 

A hybrid target-to-layout synthesis method for mmWave on-chip inductive elements has been presented. A hierarchical flow unifies device- and circuit-level specifications, utilizing a reusable HFORD core for layout seed generation and post-optimization for circuit refinement. To ensure highly effi-cient layout generation, the framework integrates performance-aware sparse-fitting sampling and physics-informed parametric modeling alongside random-forest, VAE, MDN, and PSO algorithms. Validation on mmWave inductors and transformers confirms that the proposed method successfully generates DRC-compliant layouts and reduces the design cycle from hours to minutes compared to conventional forward optimiza-tion methods. Validated in a 40-nm RF CMOS process, the modular HFORD framework will be extended to different PDKs, technology nodes, and broader passive synthesis tasks in future work. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

Generative artificial intelligence (AI) tools were utilized in the preparation of this manuscript. Specifically, OpenAI ChatGPT and Google Gemini were used for minor grammar corrections, improving sentence structure, and refining the academic tone during the proofreading and editing phases of manuscript development. The authors confirm that all substantive intellectual content, research design, data analysis, and conclusions remain the original work of the authors, who take full responsibility for the content of this publication. REFERENCES [1] R. G. Meyer, Design, simulation and applications of inductors and transformers for Si RF ICs . Springer, 2000. [2] S. Cui and D. S. Weile, “Robust design of absorbers using genetic algorithms and the finite element-boundary integral method,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. , vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 3249–3258, 2003. [3] O. Ozgun, S. Mutlu, M. I. Aksun, and L. Alatan, “Design of dual-frequency probe-fed microstrip antennas with genetic optimization algo-rithm,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. , vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 1947–1954, 2003. [4] F. Ashinnmanesh, A. Dorandi, and M. Shahabadi, “Design of a single-feed dual-band dual-polarized printed microstrip antenna using a boolean particle swarm optimization,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. , vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1845–1852, 2008. [5] P. Nayeri, F. Yang, and A. Z. Elsherbeni, “Design of single-feed reflectarray antennas with asymmetric multiple beams using the particle swarm optimization method,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. , vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4598–4605, 2013. [6] Q. Wu, H. Wang, and W. Hong, “Multistage collaborative machine learning and its application to antenna modeling and optimization,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. , vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 3397–3409, 2020. [7] Q. Wu, W. Chen, C. Yu, H. Wang, and W. Hong, “Machine-learning-assisted optimization for antenna geometry design,” IEEE Trans. Anten-nas Propagat. , vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 2083–2095, 2024. [8] S. Koziel and M. Abdullah, “Machine-learning-powered EM-based framework for efficient and reliable design of low scattering metasur-faces,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. , vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 2028– 2041, 2021. [9] D. R. Prado, J. A. L´ opez-Fern´ andez, M. Arrebola, M. Rodr´ ıguez-Pi˜ no, and G. Goussetis, “Wideband shaped-beam reflectarray design using support vector regression analysis,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett. , vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 2287–2291, 2019. [10] J. P. Jacobs, S. Koziel, and S. Ogurtsov, “Computationally efficient multi-fidelity bayesian support vector regression modeling of planar antenna input characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. , vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 980–984, 2013. [11] Y. He, J. Huang, W. Li, L. Zhang, S.-W. Wong, and Z. N. Chen, “Hybrid method of artificial neural network and simulated annealing algorithm for optimizing wideband patch antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Prop-agat. , vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 944–949, 2024. [12] L.-Y. Xiao, W. Shao, X. Ding, and B.-Z. Wang, “Dynamic adjustment kernel extreme learning machine for microwave component design,” 

IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. , vol. 66, no. 10, pp. 4452–4461, 2018. [13] Z. Zhou, Z. J. Wei, Y. Ren, Y. Yin, G. F. Pedersen, and M. Shen, “Rep-resentation learning-driven fully automated framework for the inverse design of frequency-selective surfaces,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. , vol. 71, no. 6, pp. 2409–2421, 2023. 12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS 

[14] W. Zhang et al. , “Space mapping approach to electromagnetic-centric multiphysics parametric modeling of microwave components,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. , vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 3169–3185, 2018. [15] D. R. Prado, J. A. L´ opez-Fern´ andez, M. Arrebola, and G. Goussetis, “Support vector regression to accelerate design and cross-polar opti-mizations of shaped-beam reflectarray antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. , vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 1659–1668, 2019. [16] A. Gupta, E. A. Karahan, C. Bhat, K. Sengupta, and U. K. Khankhoje, “Tandem neural network based design of multiband antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagat. , vol. 71, no. 8, pp. 6308–6317, 2023. [17] Y. Zhang and J. Xu, “Inverse design of dual-band microstrip filters based on generative adversarial network,” IEEE Microw. Wireless Technol. Lett. , vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 29–32, 2024. [18] C. Zhang, J. Jin, Q. Na, M. Zhang, and M. Yu, “Multivalued neural network inverse modeling and applications to microwave filters,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. , vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 3781–3797, 2018. [19] L. Yuan, X.-S. Wang, H. Huang, and B.-Z. Wang, “An efficient arti-ficial neural network model for inverse design of metasurfaces,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett. , vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 2013–2017, 2021. [20] Z. Zhou, Z. H. Wei, J. Ren, Y. Z. Yin, J. Li, and T.-T. Chan, “End-to-end machine-learning framework for electromagnetic inverse design: From practical constraints to optimized structures,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. , vol. 73, no. 11, pp. 8690–8708, 2025. [21] E. A. Karahan, Z. Liu, A. Gupta, Z. Shao, J. Zhou, U. Khankhoje, and K. Sengupta, “Deep-learning enabled generalized inverse design of multi-port radio-frequency and sub-terahertz passives and integrated circuits,” Nat. Commun. , vol. 15, no. 10734, 2024. [22] H. Chae, H. Yu, S. Li, and D. Z. Pan, “PulseRF: Physics augmented ML modeling and synthesis for high-frequency RFIC design,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD) , 2024, pp. 1–9. [23] H. He, Y. Xu, L. Xia, Y. Hu, F. Cai, and T. Chi, “MOTIF-RF: Multi-template on-chip transformer synthesis incorporating frequency-domain self-transfer learning for RFIC design automation,” in Proceedings of the Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC) ,2026, pp. 1138–1144. [24] J. Wei et al. , “Highly efficient automatic synthesis of a millimeter-wave on-chip deformable spiral inductor using a hybrid knowledge-guided and data-driven technique,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 4413–4422, 2023. [25] M. D. McKay, R. J. Beckman, and W. J. Conover, “A comparison of three methods for selecting values of input variables in the analysis of output from a computer code,” Technometrics , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 239– 245, 1979. [26] A. I. J. Forrester, A. S´ obester, and A. J. Keane, Engineering Design via Surrogate Modelling: A Practical Guide . Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 2008. [27] J. E. Fieldsend, “Running up those hills: Multi-modal search with the niching migratory multi-swarm optimiser,” in 2014 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC) , 2014, pp. 2593–2600. [28] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine Learning , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32, 2001. [29] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in 

2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April 14–16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings ,2014. [30] A. A. Rad, M. Hasler, and M. Jalili, “Reservoir optimization in recurrent neural networks using properties of Kronecker product,” Logic Journal of the IGPL , vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 670–685, 2010. [31] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning . New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2006. [32] J. Pierezan and L. Dos Santos Coelho, “Coyote optimization algorithm: A new metaheuristic for global optimization problems,” in 2018 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC) , 2018, pp. 1–8. [33] D. Lee, G. Shin, S. Lee, K. Kim, T.-H. Oh, and H.-J. Song, “Neural-network-based automated synthesis of transformer matching circuits for RF amplifier design,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. , vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 4726–4739, 2022.