Title: Buffer-Parameterized Machine Learning Surrogate Models for Cross-Technology Signal Integrity Analysis and Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.18170v1

Published Time: Tue, 19 May 2026 02:44:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Buffer-Parameterized Machine Learning Surrogate Models for Cross-Technology Signal Integrity Analysis and Optimization 

Julian With¨ oft, Werner John, Emre Ecik, Ralf Br¨ uning, J¨ urgen G¨ otze 

Abstract —Signal integrity (SI) analysis in printed circuit board (PCB) interconnects faces increasing complexity due to diverse integrated circuit (IC) buffer technologies, varying operating conditions, and manufacturing tolerances. Existing machine learning (ML) surrogate models for predicting SI metrics such as the inner eye contour, eye-height (EH), eye-width (EW), and transient waveform features typically rely on fixed buffer parameters, requiring costly new data generation and retraining cycles for every technology shift. This paper introduces a buffer-parameterized ML surrogate modeling methodology capable of handling cross-technology variations without retraining by treat-ing IC buffer characteristics, e.g., clock frequency, supply voltage, rise/fall times, jitter, and internal resistors and capacitors, as dynamic model inputs alongside PCB parameters. To identify the optimal surrogate architecture for this high-dimensional space, a comprehensive benchmarking study compares tree-based methods (RFR/GBM), kernel methods (SVR/KRR), Gaussian process regression (GPR), and neural networks. The framework is subsequently validated on a complex interconnect with 44 design parameters. Results show that while anisotropic GPR excels in low-data regimes, neural networks heavily outperform other models on large datasets. Finally, the practical value of the ML surrogate models is demonstrated through a cross-technology design space exploration and optimization scenario, showcasing massive computational speedups for eye mask compliance check-ing compared to simulation. 

Index Terms —Signal integrity (SI), printed circuit board (PCB) design, artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), buffer-parameterized surrogate modeling, cross-technology optimiza-tion, neural networks, Gaussian process regression (GPR), kernel methods (SVR/KRR), tree-based methods (RFR/GBM) 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# MODERN electronic systems are characterized by com-plex signal integrity (SI) requirements driven by higher clock rates, lowered voltage levels, and rise/fall times in the region of a few picoseconds. These trends significantly elevate the risk of signal reflections and distortions, making SI-compliance a critical yet challenging aspect of printed circuit board (PCB) design. The complex interaction of parasitic 

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible. This work is funded as part of the research project KI4BoardNet in the fund-ing programme MANNHEIM (BMBF) (Grant numbers 16ME0779/TUDO - 16ME0777/IDMT). The responsibility for this publication is held by the authors only. Julian With¨ oft, Emre Ecik and J¨ urgen G¨ otze are with the Informa-tion Processing Lab, Faculty for Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, TU Dortmund, Germany (e-mail: {julian.withoeft, emre.ecik, juergen.goetze }@tu-dortmund.de) Werner John is with Pyramide2525, Paderborn, Germany and the Informa-tion Processing Lab, Faculty for Electrical Engineering and Information Tech-nology, TU Dortmund, Germany (e-mail: werner.john@pyramide2525.de) Ralf Br¨ uning is with EMC Technology Center Paderborn, Zuken GmbH, Paderborn, Germany (e-mail: ralf.bruening@de.zuken.com) 

physical couplings requires careful consideration of PCB trace configurations, routing topologies, and termination strategies. The resulting design rules and requirements have become in-credibly tight, complex, and time-consuming to manage, often necessitating multiple design iterations to achieve adequate solutions. Recent advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) have demonstrated promising potential to ad-dress these challenges by supporting PCB design in terms of SI analysis and optimization. The fundamental premise of AI/ML integration in this domain is to guide PCB designers, espe-cially during pre-layout, towards appropriate design decisions through systematic capture and transfer of domain knowledge. This is achieved by training ML models on simulation data to enable prediction of various SI performance metrics such as transient waveform features like max. overshoot and rise-time degradation as well as eye diagram features like the inner eye contour, eye-height (EH), and eye-width (EW). By leveraging AI/ML-based systems that learn from ex-tensive simulation data, it becomes possible to model the complex SI behavior and provide advanced design guidance. This approach promises to maintain design flexibility while effectively reducing design cycles and supporting SI-compliant design decisions. The prediction of EH and EW from design parameters represents an extensively studied area. Early work by [1] employed an ML modeling approach to map design parameters directly to eye metrics, finding that artificial neural networks (ANNs) and support vector regression (SVR) handled the non-linear relationships better than linear regression. Further SVR applications for EH/EW prediction were implemented in [2], [3]. More advanced implementations have incorporated trans-fer learning [4], semi-supervised learning [5], and channel-characteristic modeling [6] to improve accuracy and data efficiency. Furthermore, bounded Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) has been utilized for EH/EW prediction [7]. For design optimization, genetic algorithms (GAs) paired with ANNs have been used to maximize EH [8] and to elaborate feasible design regions considering manufacturing tolerances [9], [10]. Another eye-diagram-based ML modeling approach is the prediction of the entire inner eye contour from design pa-rameters instead of just the EH and EW metrics. Initially, ANN models were utilized in [11] for the prediction of the eye contour based on a simple point-to-point interconnect by variation of the length and impedance through changes in geometry. The approach in [12] simplified the problem by predicting the eye area that is enclosed by the contour as a single parameter with an SVR. Then in [13] the prediction of the entire eye contour was realized using SVR and kernel 

> arXiv:2605.18170v1 [eess.SP] 18 May 2026 2

ML Model 2 

TX TX 

# Fixed Modeling Buffer-Parameterized Modeling 

ML Model 1 ML Model 3 

Buffer Model A Buffer Model B 

... 

TX RX Buffer Model C Buffer Model D 

... 

RX Buffer Model E Buffer Model F 

... 

RX 

# ... 

One ML Model for Any Buffer Setting 

Buffer Model A Buffer Model B 

... 

TX RX Buffer Model C Buffer Model E Buffer Model D Buffer Model F 

... ... Advantages: - Makes buffer behavior trainable - Flexible towards buffer behavior - No need for additional training data whenever the buffer model changes (i.e. new manufacturer/technology)  

> Fig. 1. Fixed-buffer vs. buffer-parameterized ML modeling for SI analysis.

ridge regression (KRR) models indicating that on average the KRR provides more accurate predictions than the SVR. Beyond eye diagram analysis, transient waveform metrics such as energy, entropy, rise time, and overshoot have been modeled using ML surrogate approaches in [14]. To provide PCB designers with physically explainable AI models, deci-sion trees (DTs) were introduced for SI anomaly detection in [15], and subsequently combined with SVR to systematically extract entire SI-compliant parameter spaces [16]. Alongside these anomaly detection methodologies, transfer learning prin-ciples have been applied to improve data efficiency when transitioning between technologies, such as from DDR3 to DDR4 [17], while reinforcement learning (RL) has been utilized for fast transient design optimization [18]. Other modeling efforts, such as the work in [19], have successfully used ML to map transmission line geometries to frequency-dependent RLGC parameters. While this ap-proach effectively replaces time-consuming electromagnetic field solvers for transmission line characterization, it still necessitates a traditional circuit simulation step to compute the final SI metrics. In contrast, direct modeling approaches map design parameters straight to SI metrics. By avoiding this intermediate circuit simulation step, direct modeling achieves the significant computational speedups required for extensive, iterative pre-layout design space exploration and optimization. While previous studies prove ML is promising, they share a methodological limitation regarding integrated circuit (IC) buffer behavior. State-of-the-art approaches typically train Machine Learning Surrogate Model Input: Design Parameters Output: Signal Integrity Features  

> Fig. 2. Conceptual workflow of ML surrogate modeling for predicting SI features at the output from design parameters at the input.

models by varying PCB parameters while keeping buffer characteristics (e.g., clock frequency, voltage levels, rise/fall times, driver strength) fixed. If a different buffer technology is utilized, the trained model becomes obsolete, necessitating a costly new data-generation and retraining cycle. This rigidity is illustrated in Fig. 1 with the fixed-buffer modeling approach. While transfer learning can partially reduce this recurring sim-ulation effort, it does not entirely alleviate this computational burden. To overcome this inefficiency, this paper proposes a fun-damental methodological shift in the form of a buffer-parameterized surrogate framework. In practical high-speed design workflows, engineers frequently reuse a limited li-brary of standard interconnect topologies, while the primary variables across product generations are the transmission line lengths, operating speeds, and IC buffer characteristics [9]. Therefore, instead of treating IC buffer behavior as a fixed boundary condition, our framework treats buffer parameters alongside PCB parameters as dynamic, trainable inputs. While                 

> TABLE I OVERVIEW OF UTILIZED ML MODELS AND THEIR ABBREVIATIONS
> Machine Learning Surrogate Model Abbreviation
> Fully-Connected Artificial Neural Network ANN Ensemble Fully-Connected Artificial Neural Network Ens. ANN Encoder-Decoder Neural Network Enc-Dec Ensemble Encoder-Decoder Neural Network Ens. Enc-Dec Random Forest Regression RFR Gradient Boosting Machine GBM Support Vector Regression (Isotropic) SVR-ISO Kernel Ridge Regression (Isotropic) KRR-ISO Kernel Ridge Regression (Anisotropic) KRR-ANI Exact Gaussian Process Regression (Isotropic) GPRE-ISO Exact Gaussian Process Regression (Anisotropic) GPRE-ANI Approx. Gaussian Process Regression (Isotropic) GPRA-ISO Approx. Gaussian Process Regression (Anisotropic) GPRA-ANI 3

the interconnect topology remains fixed as a library element, this approach allows a single ML surrogate model to predict SI behavior across varying buffer specification corner cases and technology generations without retraining. By doing so, it effectively removes the simulation entirely from the optimiza-tion loop, massively accelerating design space exploration. A comprehensive benchmarking study is conducted first to establish a robust model foundation, which is then deployed for extensive, multi-technology design space exploration and optimization. The specific contributions of this work are to:  

> •

Introduce a buffer-parameterized modeling methodology that treats IC characteristics as trainable inputs to break the retraining cycle inherent in fixed-buffer models.  

> •

Conduct a comprehensive benchmarking study across various regression methods (see Table I and Fig. 2) and varying training dataset sizes to identify the optimal surrogate model type for this high-dimensional space.  

> •

Demonstrate the practical efficiency of this framework by applying the optimal model to a complex, 44 design parameter interconnect scenario for multi-generational DDR design space exploration and optimization. II. I NTERCONNECT TOPOLOGIES AND DATA GENERATION 

To demonstrate and compare the buffer-parameterized ap-proach, three different PCB structures were considered. Initially, for demonstration of the fixed-buffer modeling approach, the structure shown in Fig. 3 was utilized, which is a simple topology consisting of only a single microstrip transmission line connecting driver (TX) and receiver (RX). This is an example of a fixed-buffer modeling scenario, con-sistent with the literature discussed in Section I, as the driver and receiver parameters were fixed and only the parameters of the microstrip were varied according to Table II. Eye diagram simulations were carried out based on design of experiments (DoE) using individual Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) for 

TABLE II PARAMETER RANGES FOR THE MICROSTRIP LINE OF THE SIMPLE FIXED -BUFFER POINT -TO -POINT TOPOLOGY SHOWN IN FIG . 3 

Parameter Min Max 

Substrate Height ( h) [mm] 0.1 0.5 Trace Width ( w) [mm] 0.1 0.7 Trace Thickness ( t) [mm] 0.01 0.1 Relative Permittivity ( ϵr ) 3 5Transmission Line Length ( l) [mm] 10 100 TX RX 

# wthr

Line Length l

Fig. 3. Simple fixed-buffer point-to-point topology. TABLE III PARAMETER RANGES FOR THE COMPLEX POINT -TO -POINT TOPOLOGY SHOWN IN FIG . 4 

Parameter [Unit] Min Max 

Clock Frequency fclock [MHz] 800 2400 Rise/Fall Times [% of Tclock ] 0 40 Supply Voltage Level [V] 0.8 1.8 Jitter [% of Tclock ] 0 5TX Driver Resistance Rin,tx [Ω] 10 50 TX Driver Capacitance Cin,tx [pF] 0.1 2.0 RX Capacitance Cin,rx [pF] 0.1 2.0 TL1 Length lTL1 [mm] 1 100 TL2 Length lTL2 [mm] 1 10 TL3 Length lTL3 [mm] 1 100 TL4 Length lTL4 [mm] 0.1 10 TL5 Length lTL5 [mm] 0.1 10 TL6 Length lTL6 [mm] 0.1 10 TL1 Characteristic Impedance Z0,TL1 [Ω] 30 90 TL2 Characteristic Impedance Z0,TL2 [Ω] 30 90 TL3 Characteristic Impedance Z0,TL3 [Ω] 30 90 TL4 Characteristic Impedance Z0,TL4 [Ω] 30 90 TL5 Characteristic Impedance Z0,TL5 [Ω] 30 90 TL6 Characteristic Impedance Z0,TL6 [Ω] 30 90 TL1 Dielectric ϵeff,TL1 3 5TL2 Dielectric ϵeff,TL2 3 5TL3 Dielectric ϵeff,TL3 3 5TL4 Dielectric ϵeff,TL4 3 5TL5 Dielectric ϵeff,TL5 3 5TL6 Dielectric ϵeff,TL6 3 5Termination Resistor RT [Ω] 1 100 TX Package Resistance Rpkg,tx [m Ω] 10 500 TX Package Inductance Lpkg,tx [nH] 0.5 5.0 TX Package Capacitance Cpkg,tx [pF] 0.1 2.0 RX Package Resistance Rpkg,rx [m Ω] 10 500 RX Package Inductance Lpkg,rx [nH] 0.5 2.0 RX Package Capacitance Cpkg,rx [pF] 0.1 2.0 TX Via Resistance Rvia,tx [m Ω] 0.1 5.0 TX Via Inductance Lvia,tx [nH] 0.1 2.0 TX Via Capacitance 1 Cvia1,tx [pF] 0.05 0.8 TX Via Capacitance 2 Cvia2,tx [pF] 0.05 0.8 RX Via Resistance Rvia,rx [m Ω] 0.1 5.0 RX Via Inductance Lvia,rx [nH] 0.1 2.0 RX Via Capacitance 1 Cvia1,rx [pF] 0.05 0.8 RX Via Capacitance 2 Cvia2,rx [pF] 0.05 0.8 Termination Via Resistance Rvia,T [m Ω] 0.1 5.0 Termination Via Inductance Lvia,T [nH] 0.1 2.0 Termination Via Capacitance 1 Cvia1,T [pF] 0.05 0.8 Termination Via Capacitance 2 Cvia2,T [pF] 0.05 0.8 

training (4,000 samples), validation (1,000 samples), and test (1,000 samples) datasets to obtain EH, EW and the eye contour [20]. In the second scenario, for investigation of the buffer-parameterized approach the point-to-point structure and pa-rameter variation of [10] was utilized. The IC buffer behavior of the RX and TX was defined as variable in the sense that besides the PCB parameters e.g., transmission line lengths, characteristic impedances, dielectric constant, and termination resistance, the clock frequency dictating the datarate, supply voltage level, jitter, rise/fall times as well as internal resistance and capacitance values were also varied. A total of 40,000 training, 10,000 test and 10,000 validation samples were obtained for eye diagram and transient waveform simulations 4TX RX GND Cin,rx               

> GND Cpkg,rx
> GND GND GND GND GND Cpkg,tx
> GND Cvia2,rx Cvia1,rx Cvia2,tx Cvia1,tx Cin,tx
> GND GND Cvia2,T Cvia1,T
> TL4 TL1 TL3 TL2 TL5 TL6 Rin,tx Rpkg,tx Lpkg,tx Rvia,tx Lvia,tx Rvia,rx Lvia,rx Rpkg,rx Lpkg,rx
> Rvia,T Lvia,T RT
> VCC/2
> Via RX Branch Via Term. Branch Via TX Branch Pkg RX Branch Pkg TX Branch RX Buffer TX Buffer
> Fig. 4. Complex point-to-point topology including package parasitics and via parasitics.

based on LHS-DoE [20]. Again, EH/EW and eye contour were extracted from the eye diagram simulations and additionally the waveform features energy, entropy, maximum voltage, minimum voltage, rise time, overshoot, and propagation delay were extracted from the transient waveform simulations. Finally, for a more complex scenario the interconnect shown in Fig. 4 was utilized. This is based on a point-to-point topology, but with added IC package parasitics and vias in the interconnect path, which were parameterized based on their RLC parameters as shown in Table III. The specified design parameter ranges represent typical values derived from various IBIS models and IC datasheets. Moreover, there were more transmission line segments in the path and the phase velocity of each segment was individually characterized by 

ϵeff . While the proposed framework can seamlessly incorporate loss tangent as an additional trainable feature, it was kept fixed across all investigated scenarios in this study, as dielectric attenuation represents a secondary effect compared to the mismatch reflections dominating these specific topologies. The clock frequency was also adjusted to be significantly higher in the range of 800-2400 MHz to evaluate the method at even higher speeds. This significantly expands the number of design parameters to a total of 44 and can be seen as an example of a realistic and complex topology, which is entirely parameterizable and adaptable with respect to all relevant design parameters. Due to the high parameter count, 100,000 training samples were generated, while the test and validation datasets remained the same size as before (10,000) [20]. In general, the EH and EW measurements presented in this work are based on a modified contour-based methodology, which differs from the statistical approach used in [9], [10]. In the previous studies [9], [10], EH and EW were computed statistically by subtracting three standard deviations (3 σ) from the mean of the high and low voltage levels and the crossing times, respectively. In contrast, the modified method directly measures the absolute worst-case minimum vertical and hori-zontal opening of the eye diagram’s contour. By extracting this strict inner boundary, it captures asymmetric, deterministic, and non-Gaussian waveform distortions that a purely statistical extrapolation might misrepresent. This process was realized using a custom algorithm that isolates the inner eye contour as a 100-dimensional vector with 50 samples for the upper and 50 for the lower contour based on which subsequently the specific EH and EW metrics are computed. For pre-processing of the data, the input design parameters were normalized. EH and EW were also normalized according to the supply voltage level and unit interval (UI) respectively. The 100-dimensional eye contour vector was not processed, and the waveform features were standardized with mean and standard deviation according to [17]. The validation size was set to 25% of the training data throughout all experiments to maintain comparability across data sizes and to align with the typical 80%-20% train-validation split. The number of testing samples remained unaffected to provide a common ground for comparison. III. M ACHINE LEARNING METHODS 

A. Tree-Based Methods 

Tree-based methods such as decision tree regression (DTR), random forest regression (RFR), and gradient boosting ma-chines (GBMs) represent a class of ML models that generate predictions by constructing a series of hierarchical decisions, ultimately forming a tree-like structure. They are standard baseline choices for tabular, non-linear parametric regression, although their discrete splitting nature can limit performance for smooth, continuous waveform predictions. DTR recursively partitions the feature space into rectangular regions by splitting on feature values. Each region corresponds to a leaf, where the model predicts a constant value equal to the mean of the target values of the training samples in that leaf. RFR is essentially an ensemble of DTRs, operating by constructing a multitude of decision trees during training, each built on a random subset of the data and considering only a random subset of features at each split. This intentional randomness reduces the correlation between individual trees, leading to a more robust and accurate overall prediction, which is obtained by averaging the predictions from all the individual trees in the forest [21]. GBMs, on the other hand, train decision trees sequentially, with each new tree attempting to minimize the residuals from the predictions of all previously trained trees, effectively learning from their mistakes. This sequential approach focuses on instances with high prediction errors in previous stages, thereby increasing overall accuracy [22]. 5

B. Gaussian Process Regression 

Gaussian processes (GPs) offer a robust Bayesian non-parametric framework for regression. A function f (x) is drawn from a GP defined by its mean m(x) and covariance (kernel) function k(x, x′):

f (x) ∼ GP (m(x), k (x, x′)) (1) Observations are modeled as y = f + ϵ, where ϵ ∼N (0, σ 2

> n

I) represents Gaussian noise. The kernel is essential to a GP as it models the similarity between function values at any two input points x and x′. In this work, radial basis function (RBF) kernels are exclusively employed, with two primary forms considered:  

> •

Isotropic RBF Kernel: This form assumes a single lengthscale ℓ for all input dimensions, implying that all features contribute equally to the similarity measure: 

k(x, x′) = σ2 

> signal

exp 



− ∥x − x′∥2

2ℓ2



(2) where σ2 

> signal

is the signal variance.  

> •

Anisotropic RBF Kernel: This more flexible form allows for distinct lengthscales ℓd for each input dimension d

and therefore enables automatic relevance determination (ARD), where the model learns the individual relevance of each input feature: 

k(x, x′) = σ2 

> signal

exp − 12

> D

X

> d=1

(xd − x′

> d

)2

ℓ2

> d

!

(3) For exact GPR [23], the predictive mean μ(x∗) and vari-ance σ2(x∗) for a test point x∗ are given by μ(x∗) =

k(x∗, X)( K(X, X) + σ2

> n

I)−1y and σ2(x∗) = k(x∗, x∗) −

k(x∗, X)( K(X, X) + σ2

> n

I)−1k(X, x∗), where K(X, X) is the training kernel matrix, k(x∗, X) is the covariance vector between x∗ and training inputs, k(X, x∗) is its transpose, and k(x∗, x∗) is the prior variance at the test point. This approach, however, quickly becomes computationally and memory intensive due to the cubic computational scaling with the number of training samples ( O(N 3)) required for matrix inversion, as well as the quadratic memory scaling ( O(N 2))to store the covariance matrix making exact GP impractical for large datasets. Therefore, in this work, exact GP was only employed for lower dimensional tasks such as the discrete EH/EW (max. 5000 training samples) and waveform feature (max. 1000 training samples) modeling, but not for the eye contour prediction. To address scalability to larger datasets, approximate vari-ational GPR [24] is predominantly used. This approach in-troduces M inducing points Z (where M ≪ N ) with cor-responding function values u, transforming the optimization into maximizing the evidence lower bound (ELBO): 

LELBO = Eq(f )[log p(y|f )] − KL (q(u)|| p(u)) (4) where q(u) = N (μu, Σu) is the variational posterior over the inducing points u, and q(f ) = R p(f |u)q(u)du is the marginal posterior over the function values f . This reduces the computational complexity to O(N M 2) and the memory requirement to O(N M ), making the approach tractable. In this work, the number of inducing points M was set to 

M = min(1000 , 0.5 × N ).For multi-output GPs, the linear coregionalization model (LCM) [25] describes each of the Q output functions fq (x)

as a linear combination of L independent latent GPs: 

fq (x) = 

> L

X

> l=1

wql gl(x), gl(x) ∼ GP (0 , k l(x, x′)) . (5) where wql denotes the mixing weight for latent l and output 

q. In this work, L = 2 for EH/EW, L = 7 for waveform features, and L = 3 for eye contour prediction was chosen to keep computations feasible across all training sample sizes. 

C. Kernel Methods 

Kernel methods represent a class of ML algorithms that implicitly map input data into a higher-dimensional feature space, where linear models can then be applied. This transfor-mation, often referred to as the kernel trick, allows the models to capture complex nonlinear relationships in the original input space without explicitly computing the coordinates in the higher-dimensional space [26]. The core of these methods lies in the choice of the kernel function k(x, x′), here implemented using the same isotropic and anisotropic RBF kernels applied in the GPR models. SVR adapts the principles of support vector machines (SVMs) to regression tasks. The goal of SVR is to find a function that deviates from the training data by no more than a specified margin ϵ, while simultaneously being as flat as possible. It achieves this by defining an ϵ-insensitive tube around the regression line, penalizing only those errors that fall outside this margin. For multi-output regression the MSVR implementation from [27] was utilized, which is inherently designed to handle multi-target prediction through a vector-valued formulation. The MSVR model predicts a new input 

x∗ as: 

ˆy(x∗) = k(x∗, X)A + b, (6) where A is the N × Q matrix of learned coefficients and b

is the Q-dimensional bias vector. Extensive hyperparameter tuning (1,000 iterations) failed to yield satisfactory perfor-mance for the anisotropic SVR model, indicating that the length scales could not be properly optimized. As a result, only the isotropic SVR predictions are presented. KRR extends normal ridge regression by employing the kernel trick to implicitly map data into a higher-dimensional feature space. It aims to find a function that minimizes the sum of squared errors while simultaneously penalizing the com-plexity of the model using L2 regularization on the coefficients to prevent overfitting. A vector-valued KRR (VVKRR) imple-mentation based on [28] was employed, providing inherent multi-output support and explicit modeling of dependencies between output dimensions. The prediction for a new input 

x∗ is computed as: 

ˆy(x∗) = k(x∗, X) C B , (7) 6

where C is the N × Q matrix of learned coefficients, and B

is the Q × Q output kernel matrix, modeling the correlations between outputs. 

D. Neural Networks 

Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are among the most widely used ML architectures and are often referred to as fully-connected/dense networks or multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). They are characterized by layers in which each neuron is con-nected to all neurons in the subsequent layer. This architecture allows ANNs to learn highly complex mappings from input to output, making them universal function approximators capable of modeling a wide range of functions [29]. Besides standard fully-connected ANN-based models, more complex encoder-decoder neural network architectures [30] are also considered in this work. An encoder-decoder neural network splits the prediction task into two parts: an encoder processes the input data i.e. the design parameters into a context vector and the decoder then generates the output from this context. For discrete SI metrics such as EH, EW, overshoot, and rise time, the multi-head attention (MHA)-based dense encoder-decoder architecture shown in Fig. 5 (a) was used. It is important to note that the MHA here operates as a feature-wise attention mechanism across the static input vector. It allows the model to dynamically weight the relevance of the high-dimensional design parameters when predicting scalar outputs. For the eye contour prediction, a dense encoder paired with a recurrent bidirectional long short-term memory (Bi-LSTM) decoder shown in Fig. 5 (b) was employed. While temporal attention mechanisms are standard for complex sequence-to-sequence mappings, eye contour prediction requires unfolding a static latent vector into a short, 50-sample sequence. Because the Bi-LSTM decoder evaluates the full latent representation of the design parameters at every decoding timestep, it inher-ently avoids the information-loss bottlenecks typical of long sequences. Furthermore, the eye contour represents a highly correlated, smoothly continuous physical waveform. Conse-quently, attention mechanisms were intentionally omitted from the contour decoder. Our experiments indicated that for a Input: Design Parameters               

> x , x , … ,x (Shape D,) 12D
> Dense ReLU 256 Neurons Dense ReLU 256 Neurons Feature-Wise MHA 4 Heads Dense ReLU 256 Neurons Dense ReLU 256 Neurons Output: Static SI Metrics
> y , y , … ,y (Shape Q,) 12Q
> Encoder Decoder Input: Design Parameters
> x , x , … ,x (Shape D,) 12D
> Dense ReLU 256 Neurons Dense ReLU 256 Neurons Repeat Latent Vector (50) BiLSTM 256 Neurons BiLSTM 256 Neurons Output: Eye Contour
> y , y , … ,y (Shape 50,2) 12Q
> Encoder Decoder
> (a) (b)
> Fig. 5. Encoder-decoder architectures for prediction of discrete SI metrics such as EH, EW, overshoot, and rise time (a) and the eye contour (b).

sequence of this physical nature and length, the Bi-LSTM is structurally sufficient and adding attention only introduced re-dundant parameterization, increased computational overhead, and elevated overfitting risks without yielding meaningful accuracy improvements. To further enhance predictive accuracy and robustness, ensemble learning was applied to the neural network models. This did involve the training of the same neural network architecture with an ensemble size of 25 times independently. The predictions from these 25 individual networks were then averaged to form the final ensemble output. This strategy leverages the diversity arising from random initializations and training variability, leading to improved accuracy and stability over single models as demonstrated in [31]. 

E. Hyperparameter Optimization 

The predictive performance of ML models is intrinsically linked to model-specific hyperparameters, which govern con-vergence stability and generalization accuracy. Since these parameters cannot be learned directly from the data, an effi-cient and automated search strategy is required. Consequently, Bayesian optimization (BO) was employed, following method-ologies established in prior studies [10], [14]. Implemented via the Optuna framework [32], this approach constructs a proba-bilistic surrogate model to prioritize high-potential regions of the search space, offering superior sample efficiency compared to exhaustive grid or random searches. A computational budget of 100 iterations was allocated to ensure robust hyperparameter identification. IV. S IMPLE FIXED -B UFFER EXAMPLE 

Initially, the simple fixed-buffer example based on the interconnect shown in Fig. 3 was utilized to compare the ML models for prediction of the EH and EW as well as the eye contour. The testing accuracy was evaluated using the root mean squared error (RMSE) and R2-score for a varying number of training sample sizes to analyze the capability of the ML models for different data scarcities. For the eye contour specifically, these metrics were calculated globally across the entire 100-dimensional coordinate vector. The results in Fig. 6 show that in the low data regions with 1000 training samples and below, the anisotropic versions of the GPR and KRR are particularly strong, while in the region with more training samples neural networks dominate as expected. In summary, despite differences in performance across data regimes, all ML models demonstrated a strong ability to learn the underlying nonlinear mapping, with their accuracies remaining closely clustered overall. This observation can be further supported based on the eye contour prediction example shown in Fig. 7. Predictions from a selection of models for a single test sample are displayed for training sets of 500 and 4000 samples. It is obvious that all of the models fit the eye contour well with both training data sizes. This visual evidence is consistent with the quantitative results from Fig. 6 indicating that the complexity of this task is moderate and therefore easily learnable even with only 500 training samples. 7  

> Fig. 6. Testing RMSE and R2-score for prediction of EH, EW, and eye contour for a varying number of training samples based on the simple fixed-buffer scenario of Fig. 3.

V. B UFFER -P ARAMETERIZED APPROACH 

For the buffer-parameterized approach, the point-to-point structure and parameter variation of [10] was utilized. This leads to a higher number of variable PCB parameters with three transmission line lengths and characteristic impedances, the termination resistor, and the dielectric behavior of the PCB material. Additionally, according to the buffer-parameterized approach, the IC buffer parameters for TX and RX were also varied with respect to different clock speeds, voltage levels, rise/fall times, and jitter as well as the internal resistor and 

> Fig. 7. Eye contour predictions of various ML models on a single test sample, with models trained on 500 and 4,000 samples, for the simple fixed-buffer scenario shown in Fig. 3. For color-coding see Fig. 6.

capacitor values. This significantly complicates the ML mod-eling problem as more complex effects and interdependencies have to be taken into account. The testing RMSEs and R2-scores for a varying number of training samples are shown for the prediction of EH, EW, eye contour, and waveform features in Fig. 8. The patterns that were only subtly observed in the fixed-buffer modeling scenario are intensified as for larger numbers of training samples the neural networks dominate more significantly, while in low data regimes the anisotropic GPR heavily outperforms the other models. The anisotropic KRR and the GBM offer respectable performance, but yielded comparatively lower accuracies across all training sample sizes in this specific comparison. For the neural networks, ensembling has a strong positive impact and the encoder-decoder architecture shows its strengths in the region with a maximum number of training samples. Kernel methods   

> Fig. 8. Testing RMSE and R2-score for prediction of EH, EW, eye contour, and transient waveform features for a varying number of training samples based on the buffer-parameterized approach for the point-to-point topology from [10]. 8

and GPR with isotropic kernels as well as RFR performed significantly worse compared to the other models, representing the lower tier of predictive accuracy in this comparison. Specifically for the prediction of the eye contour using the anisotropic GPR model, different latents of the LCM output kernel were explored in Fig. 10 to analyze the impact of a higher number of latents compared to the default of 3. While increasing the number of latents can slightly improve the prediction performance, the accuracy with 3 latents is already very close. Moreover, these larger latents also significantly increase computational complexity and make training on larger datasets infeasible even with approximate GP. In Fig. 9 some eye contour predictions on the testing dataset are shown based on 500 and 40,000 training samples. The first two test examples demonstrate the superiority of the ensemble encoder-decoder model (red color) trained on 40,000 training samples compared to all of the other models, which learn a representation that is much further from the actual eye contour shape, while with 500 samples all models perform poorly. In the third test example, where the eye contour follows a less complex temporal pattern, it can be observed that except for the SVR all models achieve a good fit if trained with 40,000 training samples. At 500 samples, the anisotropic GPR yields the best relative accuracy compared to the other models, which is consistent with Fig. 8. However, its absolute prediction             

> Fig. 9. Eye contour predictions of various ML models on three test samples, with models trained on 500 and 40,000 samples, using the buffer-parameterized approach for the point-to-point topology from [10]. For color-coding see Fig. 8.
> Fig. 10. Testing RMSE and R2-score for prediction of the eye contour with an anisotropic approximate GPR model using varying numbers of LCM latents.

is still noticeably far from the ground truth. Overall, it is clear that with only 500 training samples unlike the fixed-buffer example the accuracy is insufficient and the increased number of samples is strongly beneficial to achieve good prediction performance, due to the much higher complexity of the modeling task at hand. VI. C OMPLEX INTERCONNECT WITH ADDED VIAS AND 

PACKAGE PARASITICS 

Finally, for the complex buffer-parameterized scenario shown in Fig. 4 with a total of 44 design parameters, the modeling problem becomes even more difficult. Here, the main focus was on eye contour prediction for a selection of models that performed reasonably well in the previous scenario. The testing RMSE and R2-scores for a varying number of training samples are shown in Fig. 11. For this scenario, the anisotropic KRR model degraded significantly due to the high number of design parameters each with a length scale that needs to be tuned through hyperparameter optimization, which becomes infeasible. The SVR model also performed poorly, which is consistent with previous investigations. The GBM and anisotropic GPR models were strong in the low data regime, while the neural networks achieved the best performance only for very large training datasets. This behavior mirrors the observations from the buffer-parameterized scenario, with GPR and GBM outperforming neural networks at small to moderate data sizes, but a clear shift toward a more data-intensive regime is evident. This can be attributed to the larger number of design parameters. In general, increasing the number of training samples is necessary to achieve comparable performance, due to the                                                                                             

> Fig. 11. Testing RMSE and R2-score for prediction of the eye contour for a varying number of training samples based on the complex buffer-parameterized scenario with added vias and package parasitics of Fig. 4. 9
> TABLE IV MODEL PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BASED ON THE R2-SCORE AND THE SAMPLE -WISE NRMSE NORMALIZED BY THE MAXIMUM VERTICAL SWING OF THE INNER EYE CONTOUR
> Model NRMSE [%] R2-Score [%] Fig. 8 10k 40k 100k 10k 40k 100k
> Enc-Dec 8.7 6.6 –88.2 91.9 –Ensemble Enc-Dec 7.6 5.6 –90.1 94.1 –ANN 9.5 8.2 –87.3 90.2 –Ensemble ANN 8.5 7.2 –88.7 91.7 –GPR Anisotropic 11.4 10.8 –83.3 84.5 –GBM 10.0 8.9 –85.0 88.0 –
> Fig. 11 10k 40k 100k 10k 40k 100k
> Enc-Dec 12.2 8.8 7.7 82.2 89.8 92.1 Ensemble Enc-Dec 10.2 7.7 6.6 86.2 91.8 93.9 ANN 11.6 9.4 8.5 82.8 88.9 90.9 Ensemble ANN 10.6 8.3 7.5 85.7 90.8 92.7 GPR Anisotropic 11.3 10.3 9.9 85.5 87.6 88.7 GBM 11.8 10.4 9.8 83.0 86.3 87.4

higher modeling complexity introduced by the significantly larger design parameter dimensionality. This is also backed by the data shown in Table IV, which compares the sample-wise NRMSE, normalized by the maximum vertical swing of the inner eye contour, and the R2-scores of the best-performing models for the eye contour prediction task of Fig. 8 and Fig. 11. The results indicate that for roughly the same prediction accuracy, 2.5 times the training data was needed for the complex case. This approximately corresponds to the threefold increase in design parameter dimensionality, suggesting that within the investigated range, the required amount of training data increases nearly proportionally with the number of design parameters. Fig. 12 shows the eye contour predictions on the test dataset using the ensemble ANN, ensemble encoder-decoder, GBM, and anisotropic GPR models trained with 100,000 samples. It is visible that all models achieved high prediction accuracy for both test samples, with the neural networks exhibiting a slight advantage in both cases over GPR and GBM, which aligns with the observations in Fig. 11. VII. C OMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY AND ACCELERATION 

Before deploying the buffer-parameterized framework for extensive design space exploration and optimization, it is nec-essary to mathematically quantify its computational efficiency to justify the initial data generation phase. Table V provides a summary of the computational runtimes required for the complex 44 design parameter topology. The development of the surrogate model necessitates a substantial, one-time in-vestment. Specifically, generating the 120,000 total simulation samples across the training, validation, and testing datasets takes 53 hours on a CPU, followed by 19.94 minutes of GPU-accelerated training for the most accurate encoder-decoder model. However, the fundamental advantage of the buffer-parameterized approach lies in the complete amortization of this initial cost through model reusability. Because the trained surrogate framework decouples the optimization loop from  

> Fig. 12. Eye contour predictions of various ML models on two test samples, with models trained on 100,000 samples, for the complex buffer-parameterized scenario including vias and package parasitics shown in Fig. 4. For color-coding see Fig. 11.

the slow simulation engine, it is instantly applicable to any arbitrary IC buffer setting or corner case within the defined parameter bounds without ever requiring a new simulation or retraining cycle. To demonstrate the value of this reusability, the framework was deployed across four distinct design sce-narios encompassing varying DDR generations and impedance tolerances, resulting in a massive scale of 500,000 parameter permutations. Utilizing traditional CPU-based simulation ex-ecuting these 500,000 runs would demand over 220 hours of continuous computation. The surrogate model runs inference on the entire 500,000-permutation set in 135.43 seconds on a CPU resulting in an approximate 5,871 × speedup over simulation. When hardware acceleration is utilized, GPU-based inference completes the task in 4.98 seconds, yielding an approximate 159,600 ×

speedup over simulation. This demonstrates that while a single, narrow optimization run might theoretically be faster using di-rect simulation, practical, cross-technology workflows require a large number of iterative evaluations. By rendering inference orders of magnitude faster than simulation, the proposed methodology transforms exhaustive design space exploration into a highly efficient verification process.                                                            

> TABLE V DETAILED COMPUTATIONAL COST SUMMARY FOR DATA GENERATION ,
> TRAINING ,AND INFERENCE FOR THE COMPLEX 44 DESIGN PARAMETER TOPOLOGY
> Phase Method Samples Runtime Speedup
> Initial Model Development (One-Time Investment):
> Train Data Gen. Simulation [CPU] 100,000 44.17 h –Test Data Gen. Simulation [CPU] 10,000 4.47 h –Val. Data Gen. Simulation [CPU] 10,000 4.36 h –Total Data Gen. Simulation [CPU] 120,000 53.00 h –Model Training Enc-Dec [GPU] 100,000 19.94 m –
> Design Space Exploration & Optimization:
> Inference Simulation [CPU] 500,000 220.83 h 1×
> Inference Enc-Dec [CPU] 500,000 135.43 s ∼5,871 ×
> Inference Enc-Dec [GPU] 500,000 4.98 s ∼159,600 ×
> Hardware: AMD Ryzen 9 7900, NVIDIA RTX 4080 Super, 64 GB DDR5 RAM 10
> TABLE VI UTILIZED EYE MASK SETTINGS
> Speedgrade UI [ps] Vref [V] t0/t1[ps] V0/V1[V] DDR3-1600 625 0.75 174 / 469 0.55 / 0.95 DDR4-1600 625 0.60 174 / 469 0.50 / 0.70 DDR5-4800 208 0.55 58 / 156 0.50 / 0.60

VIII. D ESIGN SPACE EXPLORATION USING THE 

BUFFER -P ARAMETERIZED MACHINE LEARNING MODELS 

To further demonstrate the applicability and scalability of the buffer-parameterized ML framework, design optimization scenarios targeting the fulfillment of specific eye mask require-ments were investigated. These masks and the corresponding IC buffer settings, extracted from IBIS models and datasheets, are detailed in Tables VI and VII, respectively. By utilizing the eye contour ML models, design compliance can be math-ematically verified against these targets for DDR3, DDR4, and DDR5 technologies. While the investigated settings serve as representative demonstration cases, the framework can be applied to any arbitrary, user-defined buffer characteristics or eye-mask constraints simply by adjusting the input parameter vector, without requiring any structural changes to the under-lying ML architecture. 

A. DDR3 Scenario 

First, for the DDR3 scenario, 100,000 samples were gen-erated using LHS within the relevant parameter space, while the remaining parameters were fixed based on the buffer and impedance settings (initially 50 Ω matched). The ML model predictions regarding eye mask compliance (0 = not met, 1 = met) were then statistically compared to the ground-truth simulation results in Fig. 13. As expected, the previously best-performing models on the testing dataset achieved the lowest number of classification errors. Additionally, in the case of false positives, the severity of the eye mask violations, defined explicitly as the percentage of the total mask area in mV × ps encroached by the simulated inner eye contour, exhibited a significantly tighter statistical distribution for the more accurate ML models. As explicitly detailed by the density curves in Fig. 13, the optimal neural network architec-tures heavily concentrated their false positive violations near 0% severity, with the error distributions tailing off almost completely before the 5% mark. In contrast, baseline models such as the isotropic KRR and SVR exhibited heavy-tailed distributions, with violation severities spreading well beyond 15%. While it was possible to reduce the number of false positives by extending the mask voltages beyond the required eye mask values to essentially shift the decision threshold, this inevitably led to a heavy increase in false negatives. Fig. 14 shows representative eye diagrams based on pre-dictions of the best-performing encoder-decoder model. The median false positive violation example exhibited only a slight infringement of the eye mask at the right edge, indicating that most violations were minor and occurred close to the decision boundaries rather than representing gross errors. The worst-case false positive violation was more pronounced but                             

> Fig. 13. Statistical evaluation of the DDR3 design optimization showing eye mask classification and true positive violation severity per ML model. TABLE VII UTILIZED IC BUFFER SETTINGS
> Speedgrade Vdd [V] tr/t f[ps] Rtx [Ω]Ctx [pF] Crx [pF] DDR3-1600 1.5 320 32 4.3 0.7 DDR4-1600 1.2 115 32 0.78 0.43 DDR5-4800 1.1 50 30 1.0 1.0

remained within a reasonable range, as it corresponded to an edge case in which the eye opening was still largely maintained. These representative cases demonstrate that model errors are not arbitrary but are concentrated in explainable edge scenarios relative to the mask. The true positive example represented the most frequent case, with a well-defined eye opening that fit the mask with adequate margins, reflecting the model’s ability to correctly identify compliant designs. Conversely, the false negative example corresponded to an eye diagram that was close to the mask limits, making the mis-classification plausible. Overall, these visualizations confirm that violations and misclassifications predominantly occurred under marginal eye mask conditions, rather than indicating significant deficiencies of the model.            

> Fig. 14. Eye diagram examples for the DDR3 design scenario optimization with a matched characteristic impedance of 50 Ω.11
> Fig. 15. Eye diagram examples for the DDR3 design scenario optimization based on a nominal characteristic impedance of 50 Ωand manufacturing tolerances of ±20% leading to 40 Ω(left) and 60 Ω(right).

B. Validation Under Manufacturing Tolerances 

Secondly, tolerances with respect to the characteristic impedance were introduced to create a more realistic setting. For a nominal characteristic impedance of 50 Ω and a tolerance of ±20% , the corresponding corner cases are 40 Ω and 60 Ω.The same LHS setup as described previously was therefore generated twice, once with a characteristic impedance of 40 Ω

and once with 60 Ω. Based on these datasets, ML model predictions were obtained, while the ground truth eye was obtained via simulation. A design was considered valid only if the eye mask was met for both 40 Ω and 60 Ω. As expected, the number of valid designs was drastically reduced from previously 22702 to 4883, which also reflected in the ML model predictions. Among all tested models, the encoder-decoder model achieved the highest accuracy again and was thus utilized for further analysis of the eye diagrams. This analysis revealed that the design that previously passed at 50 Ω

as the true positive example was now correctly declared by the model as invalid, since at 40 Ω a small but noticeable eye mask violation occurred as shown in Fig. 15. Another design that exhibited similar characteristics but did not violate the mask at 40 Ω was also correctly classified as valid. These observations indicate that even subtle differences in the eye contour are well captured by the buffer-parameterized   

> Fig. 16. Eye diagram examples for the DDR4 (top) and DDR5 (bottom) design scenario optimization with a matched characteristic impedance of 50 Ω.

ML model. Overall, the results demonstrate the applicability of the proposed approach under varying conditions, such as deviations from the nominal 50 Ω characteristic impedance due to manufacturing tolerances. 

C. Cross-Technology Extension to DDR4/5 

Finally, the DDR4 and DDR5 eye mask and buffer char-acteristics were analyzed. Fig. 16 shows representative false and true positive eye predictions from the encoder-decoder model. For the DDR5 case the complex buffer-parameterized ML model of Fig. 11 was used. The results show that for both DDR4 and DDR5, the model correctly classifies passed and failed eye masks, with errors occurring mainly near the mask’s decision boundary. Overall, the analysis confirms that the model remains accurate across different buffer settings, with errors confined to designs near the mask boundaries, highlighting the reliability and adaptability of the approach under different technological settings. IX. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

This study demonstrates the effectiveness of buffer-parameterized ML approaches for SI analysis and optimization that incorporate buffer characteristics as trainable input param-eters. By enabling adaptability to varying buffer configurations without retraining, this approach offers significant advantages over fixed-buffer methods. It was also shown that the complex-ity of the interconnect and the number of design parameters strongly influence the amount of training data required to achieve accurate predictions. Specifically, neural networks consistently outperform other ML models when trained on large datasets, whereas anisotropic GPR achieves superior performance in low-data scenarios. These findings highlight the potential of buffer-parameterized ML-based solutions for SI analysis, design space exploration, and optimization, which was demonstrated using scenarios with varying eye mask requirements and different DDR generations to identify valid and non-compliant designs. Future research will extend the buffer-parameterized ap-proach to model more complex SI effects such as equalization, highly non-linear buffer behavior, as well as coupled and differential transmission lines. Discrete equalization settings, such as FFE or DFE tap coefficients, can be integrated as additional input parameters. To handle highly non-linear IBIS profiles, these characteristics can be mapped into compact, learnable embeddings using dimensionality reduction to main-tain computational efficiency. Furthermore, the framework can be expanded to differential signaling and coupled transmission lines by incorporating spacings as trainable input parameters to capture crosstalk and mode-conversion effects. To mitigate the curse of dimensionality when scaling to these larger parameter spaces, future data generation should transition from sampling to active learning methodologies, iteratively simulating new data within high-uncertainty regions until predictive accuracy converges. From a modeling perspec-tive, graph neural networks (GNNs) could encode the con-nectivity patterns of interconnect structures, improving gen-eralization across diverse topologies such as fly-by, star, and 12 

point-to-point. Combining these structural representations with the buffer-parameterized approach within an encoder-decoder architecture would establish a unified foundation for multi-task and meta-learning. This strategy would enable encoders to adapt to different topologies and design conditions, and decoders to specialize in the prediction of various SI metrics, supporting versatile application across design scenarios. REFERENCES [1] T. Lu, J. Sun, K. Wu, and Z. Yang, “High-Speed Channel Modeling With Machine Learning Methods for Signal Integrity Analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility , vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1957– 1964, 2018. [2] R. Trinchero and F. G. Canavero, “Modeling of eye diagram height in high-speed links via support vector machine,” in 2018 IEEE 22nd Workshop on Signal and Power Integrity (SPI) , 2018, pp. 1–4. [3] H. Ma, E.-P. Li, A. C. Cangellaris, and X. Chen, “Support Vector Regression-Based Active Subspace (SVR-AS) Modeling of High-Speed Links for Fast and Accurate Sensitivity Analysis,” IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 74 339–74 348, 2020. [4] T. Zhang, S. Chen, S. Wei, and J. Chen, “A Data-Efficient Training Model for Signal Integrity Analysis based on Transfer Learning,” in 

2019 IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems (APCCAS) ,2019, pp. 186–189. [5] S. Chen, J. Chen, T. Zhang, and S. Wei, “Semi-Supervised Learning Based on Hybrid Neural Network for the Signal Integrity Analysis,” 

IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs , vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 1934–1938, 2020. [6] D. Lho et al. , “Channel Characteristic-Based Deep Neural Network Models for Accurate Eye Diagram Estimation in High Bandwidth Mem-ory (HBM) Silicon Interposer,” IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility , vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 196–208, 2022. [7] T. Nguyen, B. Shi, H. Ma, E.-P. Li, A. Cangellaris, and J. Schutt-Aine, “Constrained Gaussian Process for Signal Integrity applications using Variational Inference,” in 2023 IEEE/MTT-S International Microwave Symposium - IMS 2023 , 2023, pp. 155–158. [8] H. H. Zhang, Z. S. Xue, X. Y. Liu, P. Li, L. Jiang, and G. M. Shi, “Optimization of High-Speed Channel for Signal Integrity With Deep Genetic Algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compati-bility , vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1270–1274, 2022. [9] J. With¨ oft, W. John, E. Ecik, R. Br¨ uning, and J. G¨ otze, “Machine Learn-ing Methods for Elaborating the Feasible Region for Signal Integrity Analysis in Differential Pair PCB Structures,” in 2024 International Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility – EMC Europe , 2024, pp. 151–156. [10] J. With¨ oft, W. John, E. Ecik, J. Wastian, R. Br¨ uning, and J. G¨ otze, “A Machine Learning Modeling and Optimization Framework for Signal Integrity Design Support,” in 2025 Asia-Pacific International Symposium and Exhibition on Electromagnetic Compatibility (APEMC) , 2025, pp. 410–413. [11] C. H. Goay, A. Abd Aziz, N. S. Ahmad, and P. Goh, “Eye Diagram Contour Modeling Using Multilayer Perceptron Neural Networks With Adaptive Sampling and Feature Selection,” IEEE Transactions on Com-ponents, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology , vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 2427–2441, 2019. [12] M. Telescu, R. Trinchero, N. Tanguy, and I. S. Stievano, “Surrogate Eye Modeling for the Statistical Assessment of a Smart Textile Interconnect,” in 2023 IEEE 27th Workshop on Signal and Power Integrity (SPI) , 2023, pp. 1–4. [13] M. Telescu, R. Trinchero, N. Soleimani, N. Tanguy, and I. S. Stievano, “Stochastic Time-Domain Mapping for Comprehensive Uncertainty As-sessment in Eye Diagrams,” IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility , vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 1930–1938, 2023. [14] J. With¨ oft, W. John, E. Ecik, R. Br¨ uning, and J. G¨ otze, “AI Models for Supporting SI Analysis on PCB Net Structures: Comparing Linear and Non-Linear Data Sources,” Advances in Radio Science , vol. 21, pp. 77–87, 2023. [15] E. Ecik, W. John, J. With¨ oft, and J. G¨ otze, “Anomaly Detection with Decision Trees for AI Assisted Evaluation of Signal Integrity on PCB Transmission Lines,” Advances in Radio Science , vol. 21, pp. 37–48, 2023. [16] E. Ecik, W. John, J. With¨ oft, R. Br¨ uning, and J. G¨ otze, “An Approach for SI-Compliant Parameter Space Evaluation Using a Decision Tree-Based AI Module,” in 2024 Kleinheubach Conference , 2024, pp. 1–4. [17] J. With¨ oft, W. John, E. Ecik, and J. G¨ otze, “AI-Based SI-Compliant PCB Design Support for DDR Technology Enhanced by Transfer Learning,” in 2023 International Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility – EMC Europe , 2023, pp. 1–6. [18] J. With¨ oft, W. John, E. Ecik, R. Br¨ uning, and J. G¨ otze, “Optimiza-tion of a Daisy Chain PCB Memory System through Reinforcement Learning under Consideration of Signal Integrity Constraints,” in 2023 Kleinheubach Conference , 2023, pp. 1–4. [19] S. Penugonda, S. Yong, A. Gao, K. Cai, B. Sen, and J. Fan, “Generic Modeling of Differential Striplines Using Machine Learning Based Regression Analysis,” in 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Elec-tromagnetic Compatibility & Signal/Power Integrity (EMCSI) , 2020, pp. 226–230. [20] Analog Devices, “LTspice XVII,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.analog.com/en/design-center/design-tools-and-calculators/ ltspice-simulator.html [21] L. Breiman, “Random Forests,” Machine Learning , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32, 2001. [22] J. H. Friedman, “Greedy Function Approximation: A Gradient Boosting Machine,” Annals of Statistics , vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 1189–1232, 2001. [23] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning . Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2006. [24] M. Titsias, “Variational Learning of Inducing Variables in Sparse Gaus-sian Processes,” in Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , vol. 5, 2009, pp. 567–574. [25] E. V. Bonilla, K. M. A. Chai, and C. K. I. Williams, “Multi-task Gaussian Process Prediction,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 20, 2007, pp. 153–160. [26] B. Sch¨ olkopf and A. J. Smola, Learning with Kernels: Support Vector Machines, Regularization, Optimization, and Beyond . Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2002. [27] Y. Bao, T. Xiong, and Z. Hu, “Multi-step-ahead time series prediction using multiple-output support vector regression,” Neurocomputing , vol. 129, pp. 482–493, 2014. [28] N. Soleimani and R. Trinchero, “Efficient Implementation of the Vector-Valued Kernel Ridge Regression for the Parametric Modeling of the Frequency-Response of a High-Speed Link,” in 2023 XXXVth General Assembly and Scientific Symposium of the International Union of Radio Science (URSI GASS) , 2023, pp. 1–4. [29] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning . Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016. [30] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Networks,” in Proceedings of the 28th International Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2014, p. 3104–3112. [31] L. Hansen and P. Salamon, “Neural network ensembles,” IEEE Trans-actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 993–1001, 1990. [32] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, “Optuna: A Next-generation Hyperparameter Optimization Framework,” in Proceed-ings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2019, pp. 2623–2631.