Title: AutoREC: A software platform for developing reinforcement learning agents for equivalent circuit model generation from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy data

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.27266v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 00:22:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# JournalName AutoREC: A software platform for developing reinforce-ment learning agents for equivalent circuit model gener-ation from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy data 

Ali Jaberi, a, ∗ Yonatan Kurniawan, b, ∗ Robert Black, a Shayan Mousavi M., a Kabir Verma, c

Zoya Sadighi, a Santiago Miret, d and Jason Hattrick-Simpers b, †

This paper introduces AutoREC, an open-source Python package for developing reinforcement learn-ing (RL) agents to automatically generate equivalent circuit models (ECMs) from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) data. While ECMs are a standard framework for interpreting EIS data, traditional identification is typically based on manual trial-and-error, which requires domain experts and limits scalability, particularly in autonomous experimental pipelines such as self-driving laboratories. AutoREC addresses this challenge by formulating ECM construction as a sequential decision-making problem within a Markov Decision Process framework. It implements a Double Deep Q-Network with prioritized experience replay, along with a dedicated dead-loop mitigation strategy, to efficiently explore a complex action space for circuit generation. To demonstrate the capabilities of the platform, we trained an RL agent using AutoREC and evaluated its strengths and limitations across diverse datasets, while also discussing possible strategies to mitigate these limitations in future agent designs. The trained agent achieved a success rate exceeding 99 .6% on synthetic datasets and demonstrated strong generalization to unseen experimental EIS data from batteries, corrosion, oxygen evolution reaction, and CO 2 reduction systems. These results position AutoREC as a promising platform for adaptive and data-driven ECM generation, with potential for integration into automated electrochemical workflows. 

# 1 Introduction 

Electrochemical systems underpin a wide range of important technologies, including batteries 1, fuel cells 2, corrosion protec-tion 3, and electrocatalytic energy conversion processes such as the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) 4 and CO 2 reduction 5. The performance and durability of these systems are governed by cou-pled electrochemical processes such as charge transfer, double-layer formation, adsorption, and mass transport. A detailed un-derstanding of these processes is therefore essential for the ra-tional design and optimization of electrochemical materials and devices. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is one of the most widely used non-destructive techniques for probing the dy-      

> aClean Energy Innovation Research Center, National Research Council Canada, Mis-sissauga, ON, Canada
> bDepartment of Material Science and Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
> cCheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada
> dLila Sciences, San Francisco, CA, USA
> ∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
> †Corresponding author. Email: jason.hattrick.simpers@utoronto.ca

namic behavior of electrochemical systems 6,7 . The measurement typically involves applying sinusoidal signal (i.e., alternating cur-rent or voltage) to the cell across a broad range of frequencies and extracting the complex impedance from the measured current or voltage response. This type of measurements enables the sepa-ration of physical processes according to their characteristic time scales. For example, high-frequency responses are often associ-ated with electrolyte resistance and interfacial charging, while lower-frequency behavior reflects charge-transfer kinetics, diffu-sion, and corrosion mechanisms. A common framework for interpreting EIS data is the use of equivalent circuit models (ECMs), in which the electrochemi-cal system is represented by a network of circuit elements such as resistors, capacitors, constant phase elements (CPEs), and diffusion-related components including Warburg or Gerischer el-ements. The parameters of an ECM can often be mapped to physically meaningful quantities, such as electrolyte resistance, charge-transfer resistance, double-layer capacitance, and mass transport coefficients. As a result, ECMs provide a compact and interpretable representation of impedance spectra that is widely used for diagnosing electrochemical performance and identifying rate-limiting processes. JournalName ,[year],[vol.], 

> 1–14 | 1
> arXiv:2604.27266v1 [cs.LG] 29 Apr 2026

Traditionally, selecting an appropriate ECM topology and fitting its parameters rely on expert intuition and manual trial-and-error, introducing subjectivity and limiting scalability. Such manual workflows present a challenge for emerging self-driving laborato-ries (SDLs), which aim to accelerate materials discovery through autonomous, high-throughput experimentation by integrating ex-periment planning, data acquisition, and analysis into closed-loop pipelines 8. To enable these pipelines, experimental EIS data must be interpreted rapidly, consistently, and without human interven-tion. However, manual ECM identification depends on human expertise and iterative trial-and-error, making it inherently time-consuming, difficult to scale, and prone to subjective variability. As a result, manual ECM identification becomes a bottleneck for integrating EIS into autonomous experimentation pipelines. Recent work has therefore explored machine learning (ML) ap-proaches to automate ECM identification from impedance data. One line of research formulates ECM selection as a classification problem, where the classification model predicts the most ap-propriate circuit topology from a predefined library of candidate ECMs. Various classifiers have been investigated, including sup-port vector machines 9, random forests 10 , gradient-boosted trees, convolutional neural networks 11 , and deep neural networks 12,13 .More recently, large language models have also been explored for ECM suggestion 14 . While these methods can achieve high ac-curacy within their training domain, they require labeled train-ing data, which can be time-consuming and labor-intensive to obtain, and may introduce subjective biases in circuit selection. Moreover, their formulation as a classification problem constrains predictions to a fixed set of predefined circuit topologies, limiting their ability to generalize to or discover previously unseen circuit structures. An alternative direction focuses on generative approaches that directly construct ECM structures. Gene Expression Programming (GEP) has been proposed to generate circuit topologies by evolv-ing symbolic expressions that represent ECMs through fitness-based selection and genetic operations 15 . Subsequent work has incorporated Bayesian inference to improve parameter estimation and ECM selection 16 . Despite their flexibility, GEP-based meth-ods operate over a vast combinatorial space of possible circuit structures without strong guidance, effectively relying on stochas-tic exploration to identify suitable candidates. As a result, the search process can be inefficient and sensitive to initialization, often requiring large populations and many evolutionary cycles to discover high-quality ECMs. This lack of structured guidance limits the efficiency and reliability of evolutionary generative ap-proaches. Recent work has also begun to explore reinforcement learn-ing (RL) for automated ECM generation from EIS data 17 . This emerging direction is well motivated by the structure of the prob-lem itself. From a modeling perspective, generating an ECM from an impedance spectrum can be viewed as a structured, sequential decision-making process. Starting from an initial, minimal cir-cuit, one iteratively decides which circuit element to introduce, how it should be connected, and when the construction should terminate. Each decision alters the representational capacity of the model and its ability to capture the observed impedance re-sponse, while also affecting model complexity and physical in-terpretability. Accordingly, ECM generation is not merely a static prediction problem, but rather a dynamic construction process in which intermediate choices influence downstream outcomes. Thus, the task naturally aligns with the RL paradigm, in which an agent interacts with an environment by taking actions and re-ceiving feedback in the form of rewards. In the context of EIS analysis, rewards can be designed to reflect the quality of the impedance fit, adherence to physical constraints, and penalties for unnecessary model complexity. Unlike classification-based ap-proaches, this formulation does not require a predefined library of circuit topologies nor labeled EIS data; and unlike evolution-ary generative methods, it avoids relying on largely unguided stochastic exploration of the search space. Instead, the agent learns adaptive strategies that focus exploration and exploitation on promising regions of the ECM space. Building on this emerging RL perspective, we develop AutoREC (Autonomous Reinforcement ECM Composer), a Python library for developing and deploying RL agents for automated ECM gen-eration from EIS data. Within AutoREC, ECM topology is encoded using a structured representation adapted from prior GEP-based approaches, enabling flexible representation of circuit models. Agents trained within AutoREC then learn to construct ECMs se-quentially using this representation under reward signals that bal-ance fitting accuracy and parsimony. Once trained, such agents can efficiently generate ECMs from given impedance spectra, of-fering a scalable and flexible alternative to existing ML and evo-lutionary methods for EIS analysis. To describe the AutoREC framework and demonstrate its use for automated ECM generation, the remainder of the paper is or-ganized as follows. Section 2 presents the RL formulation for generating ECMs as implemented in AutoREC, including the state and action spaces, the reward formulation, and the training al-gorithm. Section 3 presents demonstration results for a repre-sentative RL agent for the ECM generation task developed using AutoREC. In this section, we detail the training process for the agent used in this demonstration and evaluate its performance on synthetic training and test datasets, as well as on experimen-tal EIS spectra to illustrate how AutoREC can be used to train and assess agents on previously unseen data and circuit topolo-gies. Then, Sec. 4 discusses the strengths and limitations revealed by this representative demonstration and highlights directions for further improvement. Overall, this work does not present the representative RL agent used in this demonstration as a definitive solution to the ECM generation problem. Rather, it introduces AutoREC as a software platform for developing and deploying RL agents for this task, thereby enabling automated and scalable impedance analysis and supporting future integration into self-driving laboratory workflows. 

# 2 Methods 

2.1 Problem formulation as a Markov Decision Process 

The task of generating an ECM for EIS data is formulated as a se-quential decision-making problem and cast as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). In this framework, a RL agent iteratively modifies  

> 2 | 1–14 JournalName ,[year],[vol.],

the circuit topology, aiming to identify an ECM that achieves a high-quality fit to the target EIS. Each modification of the circuit corresponds to an action taken by the agent, and improvements in the quality of fit are reflected through the reward signal. To construct a valid MDP, the fundamental components of the RL environment, namely the state representation, action space, and reward function, are precisely defined as follows. 

2.1.1 State space 

Since the electrical circuit is continuously modified by the agent’s actions, the current circuit topology forms a core component of the state representation. The circuit is represented using a linear chromosome, following the approach introduced by Van Haever-beke et al. 15 . In this formulation, the chromosome consists of a sequence of two types of symbols: (i) terminals (circuit ele-ments), including resistors, capacitors, inductors, and CPEs (rep-resented in the chromosome as R, C, L, and P, respectively); and (ii) functions (operators), namely + and /, denoting series and parallel connections, respectively. In the general formulation, all four circuit element types can be included in the chromosome. However, in the present work, ideal capacitors are excluded from the state and action spaces in favor of CPEs, and only R, L, and P elements are considered. The chromosome is divided into a head and a tail. The head may contain both circuit elements and operators, whereas the tail is restricted to circuit elements only 15 . This linear chromosome can be deterministically transformed into a tree-based representa-tion, which is then interpreted as an electrical circuit as illustrated in Fig. 1. During this transformation, some symbols in the linear chromosome may not contribute to the resulting circuit topology; these symbols constitute the non-coding part of the chromosome. Although the non-coding part does not affect the physical circuit, it cannot be removed because the state representation must main-tain a fixed length. To address this, all symbols in the non-coding region are replaced with a dedicated non-coding token, denoted as X. The resulting chromosome is then converted into a one-hot encoded vector and flattened to form the circuit part of the state. An overview of this pipeline for encoded circuit construction is illustrated in Fig. 1. To enable the agent to construct appropriate circuits for differ-ent EIS measurements, the observed EIS data are incorporated into the state representation. Specifically, the EIS features are concatenated with the encoded circuit representation and jointly provided as input to the agent. This formulation naturally aligns with the universal value function approximator (UVFA) frame-work 18 , in which the goal is appended to the state of the function approximator. In the present context, each EIS spectrum serves as a distinct goal within the UVFA formulation. Because EIS data are complex-valued, they may be expressed using multiple representations (e.g., Nyquist or Bode), each cap-turing complementary information. To preserve this informa-tion, the real part, imaginary part, magnitude, and phase of each impedance point are extracted and normalized. The EIS feature vector is then formed by concatenating some or all of these fea-tures; augmented variants, such as inverse or sign-inverted rep-resentations, may also be included to improve robustness. In the current implementation, the selected features include the imag-inary impedance, magnitude, phase, and the negative phase as an augmented representation. An overview of this EIS state con-struction process is illustrated in Figure 2a. The final state input to the agent is obtained by concatenating the encoded circuit rep-resentation with the combined EIS feature vector (Fig. 2b). 

2.1.2 Action space 

The agent modifies the circuit topology by applying mutation op-erations to the linear chromosome representation. Each action is defined by a pair consisting of the action position at which the mutation is applied and the action type, specifying the tar-get symbol—either a circuit element or an operator. Representa-tive examples of such mutations are shown in Fig. 3. This action formulation enables the agent to alter both the structure and the complexity of the circuit, as mutations may change the length of the coding region of the chromosome, thereby producing circuits with different numbers of elements and varying topological com-plexity. As a result, each position along the chromosome can be mutated to one of N discrete actions, corresponding to the total number of elements and operators. However, a substantial fraction of the action space is invalid. Certain mutations violate physical constraints, such as those that remove the ohmic resistance, which must be present in all phys-ically meaningful ECMs. Other mutations break the grammatical rules of the chromosome, for example by converting symbols in the tail region into operators. In addition, some actions do not al-ter the circuit topology at all, either because a symbol is mutated to itself or because the mutation is applied to the non-coding re-gion of the chromosome. Whenever an invalid action is selected, the environment rejects the mutation with some penalties and re-turns the agent to the previous state. 

2.1.3 Episode initialization and termination 

At the beginning of each episode, a minimal circuit consisting of two, three, or four resistors connected in series is randomly selected as the initial state. Starting from this simple topology, the agent progressively increases the circuit complexity by apply-ing mutation actions throughout the episode. This initialization strategy provides a consistent and physically meaningful starting point while allowing the agent to explore a wide range of circuit structures. A terminal condition is required to determine when an episode should end and the environment should be reset. An episode is terminated when the agent identifies a circuit that achieves a suf-ficiently high quality of fit to the target EIS data. Rather than using a fixed termination threshold, which would be inappro-priate given the variability in EIS characteristics and noise levels across datasets, a data-dependent criterion is employed. Specif-ically, the termination threshold is defined using an offset of the chi-squared ( χ2) value obtained from fitting the EIS data with a linear Kramers–Kronig model 19 . This adaptive criterion pro-vides a consistent and physically grounded termination condition across different EIS spectra. JournalName ,[year],[vol.],   

> 1–14 | 3 Fig. 1 Pipeline for encoded circuit state construction using the linear chromosome representation of the circuit.
> Fig. 2 a) the pipeline for constructing the combined EIS representation, and b) the final state input of the agent.

2.1.4 Reward system 

After each action, the circuit generated by the agent is fitted to the target EIS data using the computationally efficient log-B loss function 20 ,

Llog-B (P) = 

> n

X

> i=1

(

log 10 

|ZGT  

> i

||ZECM (ωi, P)|

2

+

h

θGT  

> i

− θECM (ωi, P)

i2

)

,

(1) where the superscripts GT and ECM denote the ground truth and ECM prediction, respectively; |Z| and θ denote the magnitude (in 

Ω) and phase (in radians) of the complex impedance; ω denotes the signal frequency (in Hz); and P denotes the ECM component values. The reward is then assigned based on this fit quality, ne-cessitating efficient evaluation of the loss. Actions that produce invalid circuits receive a large negative reward (i.e. penalty), dis-couraging the agent from exploring physically or grammatically infeasible regions of the action space. Conversely, when a termi-  

> 4 | 1–14 JournalName ,[year],[vol.],Fig. 3 Two examples of agent’s action. The blue squares show the coding part and the black ones are non-coding part of the chromosome. The figure clearly shows that the action can change the length of the coding part, yielding circuits with different number of elements and varying complexity.

nal state is reached, defined by achieving a chi-squared value be-low the data-dependent threshold χ2

> thresh

, a large positive reward is assigned. The terminal reward is determined using a combi-nation of goodness-of-fit metrics to robustly assess model quality. Specifically, both the χ2 value and the coefficient of determina-tion ( R2) are considered, where the latter is computed by the av-erage of R2 for different EIS representations. This R2 

> avg

includes the Nyquist representation and the magnitude and phase compo-nents of the Bode representation, yielding the metrics R2

> score

, R2

> |Z|

,and R2

> ϕ

. This multi-metric formulation is motivated by prior work showing that no single metric is sufficient to fully characterize the quality of EIS fits 20 .To discourage over-complex circuit topologies, additional penalties are incorporated into the terminal reward. These penal-ties account for both the total number of circuit elements and the depth of nested parallel branches, where increased struc-tural complexity is penalized to promote simpler and more in-terpretable ECMs. In addition to terminal and invalid-action re-wards, small intermediate positive and negative rewards are as-signed during an episode to provide shaping signals that guide the agent toward progressively improved circuit models. Together, these components define a hierarchical reward structure that bal-ances fitting accuracy, physical validity, and model simplicity. The reward function hierarchy is as follow: 

r (s, a | EIS ) = 



−0.5, if action is invalid 

R  χ2, R 2

> avg

 , if χ2 < χ 2

> thresh

+0 .01 , if R2

> score

, R2

> |Z|

, and R2 

> ϕ

> 0.5

−0.01 , if R2

> score

, R2

> |Z|

, and R2 

> ϕ

> 0

−0.02 , otherwise 

,

R  χ2, R 2

> avg

 = log 10 

 1

χ2



+ log 10 

 11 − R2

> avg



+ P, 

(2) for some additional penalties P .

2.2 Training algorithm 

Given that the action space is discrete, we employ a Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN) algorithm 21–23 to maximize the cumulative reward through sequential circuit modifications. DDQN is an ex-tension of Q-learning, a model-free RL method that enables an agent to learn an optimal policy within a MDP by estimating the action-value function (Q-function) 24 . The Q-function represents the expected discounted return obtained by taking an action at in state st and following policy π thereafter, and is defined as: 

Qπ (st, a t | EIS ) = rt + γ max  

> a

Qπ (st+1 , a | EIS ) , (3) where rt is the reward at time step t, γ is the discount factor, and the EIS spectrum is included as part of the state through the UVFA formulation. In the DDQN framework, the Q-function is approximated us-ing a neural network. Two networks are employed: a main net-work, which is updated via gradient descent, and a target net-work, whose parameters are periodically updated by copying the weights of the main network. This decoupling of action selection and action evaluation by two networks mitigates overestimation bias and improves the stability of training 21 . To further enhance learning efficiency in the presence of a large and complex state space, prioritized experience replay (PER) 25 is used to sample transitions from the replay buffer instead of uniform sampling, al-lowing transitions with larger temporal-difference error, i.e., the diffference between the two sides of Eq. (3), to be sampled more frequently. The importance-sampling correction factor β used in PER is gradually increased over episodes toward a specified max-imum to reduce sampling bias as training progresses. Exploration is handled using an ϵ-greedy strategy, in which ϵ is simultaneously decreased over the same episodes until a predefined minimum value is reached, gradually shifting the agent from exploration toward exploitation of learned policy. To address the challenge posed by the large proportion of in-valid actions in the action space 17,26 , we introduce a task-specific dead-loop mitigation heuristic during training. Rather than mod-ifying the underlying RL algorithm, this procedure is intended to stabilize learning in an environment where many actions leave the circuit topology unchanged. In early stages of learning, the agent may overestimate the value of invalid actions, leading to repeated selection of such actions. Because invalid actions do not alter the circuit topology, the agent may remain in the same JournalName ,[year],[vol.], 

> 1–14 | 5

state for an entire episode, resulting in highly redundant transi-tions being stored in the replay buffer and reducing the diversity of informative experiences. To prevent this behavior, the agent monitors both the number of consecutive identical actions and the number of times the same next state is encountered within an episode. If either count exceeds a predefined threshold, the episode is identified as being trapped in a dead loop. For the subsequent action, the agent is temporarily restricted to select-ing only valid actions. By retaining invalid actions in the action space while incorporating this dead-loop detection strategy, the agent is encouraged to learn to recognize invalid actions while maintaining sufficient diversity in the replay buffer to support ef-fective learning. The pseudocode for this dead-loop detection and mitigation is provided in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1: Stepwise Dead-Loop Detection and Mitiga-tion 

Input: Thresholds Naction , Nstate // Thresholds for the number of consecutive repeated actions and states, respectively 

for episode = 1 : M do 

Reset environment and observe initial state s0;Initialize episode history H ← [ ] ;Set DL flag ← False; Set ninvalid ← 0;Set nstate ← 0;

for t = 1 : tmax do if DL flag = True then 

Restrict action space to valid actions only; 

else 

use full action space; Select action (type t, pos t) using ϵ-greedy; Execute action, observe reward rt, next state st+1 ,and validity vt;Append transition record (including (type t, pos t)

and st+1 ) to H;

// Consecutive identical invalid-action check 

if vt = 0 and t > 0 then if type t = type t−1 and pos t = pos t−1 then 

ninvalid ← ninvalid + 1 ;

ninvalid ← 0;

else 

ninvalid ← 0;

// State revisitation count over entire episode history 

nstate ← P 

> h∈H

1[h. new_state = st+1 ];

// Dead-loop detection (stepwise) 

if ninvalid ≥ Naction or nstate ≥ Nstate then 

DL flag ← True; 

st ← st+1 ;

2.3 AutoREC 

To facilitate reproducibility and broader adoption, we developed AutoREC (Autonomous Reinforcement ECM Composer), an open-source Python package for training and deploying RL agents to automatically generate ECMs from EIS data. The package is pub-licly available on GitHub. AutoREC is designed with a modular architecture, enabling users to train RL agents using their own EIS datasets and subse-quently deploy the trained agents for automated ECM generation. A schematic workflow is presented in Fig. 4, while detailed doc-umentation and usage examples are provided in the repository. Once the dataset and environment are prepared, training and de-ployment can be executed in only three lines of code as shown in Fig. 4.   

> Fig. 4 Workflow for using the AutoREC package. The three shaded trapezoids represent the three primary modules of AutoREC: EISDat-aPrep, EIS_ECM_Env, and DDQN_ECM.

The package consists of three primary modules: 1. EISDataPrep : This module processes the raw EIS data for RL training. It performs all necessary preprocessing steps, including data normalization, flattening, and threshold de-termination for terminal-state definition. Users only need to place their EIS datasets in a designated directory and load them through this module. The output is a processed dataset formatted for direct interaction with the RL environment. 2. EIS_ECM_Env : This module defines the RL environment gov-erning the interaction between the agent and the ECM con-struction process. It implements the state representation (Sec. 2.1.1) and reward formulation (Sec. 2.1.4). The en-vironment accepts the processed dataset and user-defined specifications (e.g., chromosome length and random seed for EIS sampling) and returns observations and rewards dur-ing training and inference. 3. DDQN_ECM : This module implements the RL agent and train-ing algorithm. By default, the agent is constructed as a fully connected neural network with two hidden layers (40 neu-rons per layer) and ReLU activation functions, implemented in TensorFlow. The module includes the complete DDQN training procedure and supports both training, and inference modes. All training hyperparameters can be specified either  

> 6 | 1–14 JournalName ,[year],[vol.],

through a configuration file or directly as class attributes. Additionally, the module provides circuit simplification func-tionality to consolidate series and parallel combinations of circuit elements (e.g., resistors, capacitors, and inductors) and to convert CPEs to equivalent resistive or capacitive el-ements based on their exponent parameters. Finally, if la-beled ECM data are provided during preprocessing, the mod-ule supports post-training evaluation by comparing the gen-erated circuits, including their simplified forms, with the cor-responding reference circuits. 

# 3 Results 

As a proof of concept, we demonstrate the utility of AutoREC through a representative agent developed with its default archi-tecture. The results presented in this section are intended to il-lustrate the capabilities of the platform through this specific im-plementation; accordingly, the observations and limitations dis-cussed here should be interpreted as pertaining to the trained agent rather than to AutoREC itself. We first evaluate the trained agent on synthetic data by comparing learning curves and val-idation statistics with and without dead-loop mitigation and by examining the validity of the proposed circuits across different reference ECM topologies. We then analyze the evolution of cir-cuit topologies using a utility provided in AutoREC to gain insight into the agent’s decision-making process. Finally, we evaluate the trained agent on experimental EIS data to illustrate how AutoREC can be used to deploy and assess agents on real-world, previously unseen spectra that are substantially more challenging than the synthetic benchmark. 

3.1 Training process 

For this demonstration, we trained a DDQN agent using the de-fault AutoREC architecture, i.e., a fully connected multilayer per-ceptron with two hidden layers of 40 neurons each and ReLU activation. To provide a controlled benchmark for this demon-stration, we generated a synthetic EIS dataset following ref. 27, consisting of spectra corresponding to five distinct ECMs, shown in Fig. 5a. These ECMs were selected to span several common cir-cuit topologies with varying complexity; however, they were not intended to represent the full diversity of real experimental EIS behavior. For each ECM, 300 samples were generated and split into training and test sets using a 90 : 10 ratio. The training and test data are visualized in Fig. 5b as Nyquist plots and in Fig. 5c as a lower-dimensional embedding obtained using uniform man-ifold approximation and projection (UMAP) 28 . For the latter, the embedding was obtained by training UMAP on the selected EIS representation of the training data, as described in Sec. 2.1.1. The resulting embedding shows clear separation among the five ECM classes, with training and test samples occupying overlap-ping regions within each class. The RL agent’s hyperparameters were optimized using the Python package Optuna 29 with the Tree-structured Parzen Esti-mator (TPE) algorithm 30 . In this TPE-based hyperparameter tun-ing, five hyperparameter configurations were sampled from the search space defined in Table 1 at each of the ten optimization iterations. The tuning objective was to maximize a composite score, computed at the end of a full training session of 10,000 episodes. The score is defined as the average of three metrics: (i) the normalized average reward over the last 100 episodes; (ii) the success rate , defined as the fraction of episodes in which the agent successfully terminated and generated a good-fitting ECM (i.e., satisfying the data-dependent χ2 

> thresh

threshold); and (iii) the fraction of generated ECMs that matched the reference ECM (here taken as the circuit used to generate the data). The optimal hy-perparameter values are listed in Table 1 and additional results from hyperparameter tuning are provided in the supplementary information (SI). The RL agent was trained and evaluated using the high-performance computing facilities provided by the Digital Research Alliance of Canada on the Fir cluster. All calculations were per-formed on nodes equipped with AMD EPYC™ 9655 processors. Each training session required approximately 18 CPU-hours when run on a single core. 

3.2 Demonstration on synthetic training and test sets 

We start by examining the effect of the dead-loop mitigation strategy described in Sec. 2.1.4, which increases the proportion of valid actions in the replay buffer and improves the sampling of informative transitions, enabling more efficient learning of valid actions while preserving exposure to invalid ones. Fig-ure 6a compares the learning curves obtained with and with-out dead-loop mitigation. When enabled, the agent exhibits sub-stantially faster reward growth, particularly during early training, and converges to a higher reward plateau, whereas training with-out dead-loop mitigation progresses more slowly and remains at consistently lower reward levels. Consistent with this trend, the agent trained with dead-loop mitigation also achieves higher suc-cess rates across circuit topologies (Fig. 6b), exceeding 99 .6% .These results indicate that repeated invalid actions hinder effec-tive policy updates, especially during the early exploration phase, and that moderating such actions improves sample efficiency and accelerates convergence. Based on these results, all subsequent analyses are performed using the agent trained with dead-loop mitigation. A list of ECMs suggested by the trained agent on the synthetic data is shown in Fig. 6c. The agent successfully recovers the ref-erence circuits for simpler ECMs (e.g., the first item for circuits 1–3). Minor differences arise from the action-space design, which excludes ideal capacitors and instead represents capacitive behav-ior using CPEs; this is expected and does not indicate a failure of the agent. In these cases, the fitted CPE parameters recover capacitor-like behavior, yielding impedance responses consistent with the reference circuits. Aside from these expected modeling differences, variations also appear in the arrangement of Randles-type elements, such as whether a branch is nested within another branch or appears in series with the rest of the circuit (see the first two circuits for ref-erence circuit 3). Although such configurations can yield identical impedance responses, they may imply different physical interpre-tations of the underlying electrochemical processes, for example, JournalName ,[year],[vol.], 

> 1–14 | 7

(a) 

(c) (b) Fig. 5 Representation of the EIS dataset used in this work. (a) Schematic diagrams of the five ECMs used to generate the dataset. (b) The corresponding Nyquist plot for each circuit. (c) UMAP projection of the dataset using the combined EIS representation, showing five well-separated clusters, each associated with a distinct ECM. Table 1 Hyperparameter search space and the corresponding optimal values for training the RL agent. 

Hyperparameter Type Range Optimal value Description Batch size ( ×50 ) Integer [1 , 10] 2 Mini-batch size for network updates Replay buffer capacity ( ×1,000 ) Integer [1 , 20] 20 Maximum number of stored transitions Training update frequency Integer [1 , 100] 14 Episodes between network updates Target network update frequency ( ×100 ) Integer [1 , 50] 5 Episodes between target network updates Initial ϵ Float [0 .5, 1.0] 0.9491 Initial exploration probability 

ϵ decay Float [0 .8, 0.9999] 0.9643 Multiplicative decay rate of ϵ

Minimum ϵ Float [0 .0, 0.1] 0.0932 Lower bound on exploration probability Prioritized replay α Float [0 .5, 1.5] 0.6282 Degree of prioritization in replay sampling Initial β Float [0 .01 , 0.6] 0.1074 Initial importance-sampling correction Final pa Float [0 .7, 1.3] 0.7477 Final importance-sampling correction         

> aAlthough pis theoretically bounded by p≤1.0, the present implementation permits values p > 1.0, which effectively control the rate at which the importance-sampling correction increases during training.

whether the processes occur sequentially or at the same interface. Distinguishing between such topologies using EIS data alone re-mains an open problem 31–34 . Therefore, these differences do not necessarily indicate a failure of the agent, but rather reflect the inherent non-uniqueness of ECM identification. Other deviations, however, introduce additional components that do not substantially affect the fit. Examples of such elements in Fig. 6c include the last circuits listed for circuits 2 and 4, which add branches within embedded Randles-type elements containing resistors, whose large fitted values render their contributions neg-ligible in the parallel configurations. Similarly, the last circuit for circuit 3 introduces an additional CPE in a Randles-type branch. Based on the fitted parameters, this component also contributes minimally to the overall impedance across the frequency range studied. Although these extra elements have minimal impact on the  

> 8 | 1–14

JournalName ,[year],[vol.],a) b) c) 

ECMs suggested by the RL agent trained with dead-loop mitigation 

Circuit 1 

Ref.: R1-[R2,C3] 

Circuit 2 

Ref.: R1-[R2-P3,C4] 

Circuit 3 

Ref.: R1-[R2-[R3,C4],C5] 

Circuit 4 

Ref.: R1-[R2,C3]-[R4,C5]-P6 

Circuit 5 

Ref.: R1-[R2,C3]-[R4,C5]-[R6,C7] Fig. 6 a) Comparison of learning curves for agents trained with and without dead-loop detection. Incorporating Algorithm 1 results in faster reward growth and convergence to a higher final reward, improving training efficiency. b) Agent’s success rates on the training and test sets. For each dataset, we present the results for the agents trained with and without the dead-loop mitigation. c) A list of ECMs suggested by the RL agent for each circuit topology in the training and test sets. In many cases, the agent recovers circuits equivalent to the reference, while in other cases the suggested circuits includ additional components. 

overall impedance, they increase model complexity and can re-duce interpretability or even lead to misleading physical inter-pretations of the inferred circuit 35 . This distinction shows that achieving a good fit does not always lead to a physically mean-ingful circuit model and highlights non-uniqueness of ECM iden-tification. At the same time, this limitation of the current agent points to opportunities both to develop better postprocessing tools to identify and remove such additional, low-impact ele-ments, and to further improve the RL formulation so that it more effectively favors simpler, more compact circuit structures. 

3.3 Evolution of circuit topologies 

AutoREC also provides a feature for extracting and visualizing the states visited by the agent during an episode, enabling inspection of agent’s decision-making process during evaluation. Figure 7 shows one such example, illustrating the circuit topologies gen-erated during a single episode together with their corresponding Nyquist plots for a representative spectrum in the test set. Addi-tional examples are provided in the SI. The episode begins with a baseline configuration consisting of resistors connected in series. The agent then sequentially modifies the topology—modifying connections and substituting components—to progressively increase the reward. In this rep-resentative example, the agent first establishes a structural back-bone by introducing parallel branches. Subsequently, resistors within these branches are replaced with CPEs, forming Randles-type elements. This transition enables the model to reproduce the characteristic semicircular arcs in the Nyquist plot. By the final 4 3

21 

> Fig. 7 An example evolution of the ECM and the corresponding Nyquist plots over an episode.

step, the agent converges to an ECM featuring two Randles-type elements, achieving a near-perfect fit to the test spectrum. While the precise mutation sequence varies by spectrum, a con-sistent pattern emerges: the agent always introduces a parallel branch into the series-resistors configuration as the first step. This physically intuitive heuristic is essential to capture the distinct time constants of electrochemical systems 6 and allows the agent JournalName ,[year],[vol.], 

> 1–14 | 9

to efficiently establish the dominant impedance features before refining the model. In addition, the number of mutations required to obtain good-fitting ECMs can serve as a proxy for the complexity of EIS spec-tra. Spectra with simpler features can be described by relatively simple ECMs, which can be constructed through shorter muta-tion sequences. For example, constructing a single Randle-type element requires only two mutations: introducing a parallel con-nection and replacing one of the resistors in the parallel branch with a CPE. The corresponding policy is therefore easier to learn, as it requires only a short sequence of mutations and exploration within a limited topology search space. In contrast, more complex circuits require longer mutation sequences and a broader search space, and their policies may depend on first learning simpler ones before extending to more complex structures. To investigate this effect, we examine the success rate across the training trajectory for reference circuits containing one, two, and three Randle-type elements (reference circuits 1, 3, and 5), as shown in Figure 8. Vertical dashed lines indicate when the success rate begins to increase and when it reaches a stable high plateau, indicating the stage during which the agent learns the policy for the corresponding reference topology. Consistent with earlier statements, the success rate rises and plateaus earlier in training for simpler circuits, as generating these circuits requires simpler policies that are easier for the agent to learn. In contrast, generating more complex circuits involves more intricate policies and often depends on first learning the policies for simpler cir-cuits, resulting in slower, extended learning. 0 4000 8000       

> Training trial
> (a) Circuit 1
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Success rate (%)
> 04000 8000
> Training trial
> (b) Circuit 3
> 04000 8000
> Training trial
> (c) Circuit 5
> Training set Test set
> Fig. 8 Evolution of the success rate over the training trajectory for spectra generated from reference circuits containing (a) one, (b) two, and (c) three Randles-type elements, evaluated on the training and test sets. The red vertical dashed lines indicate when the success rate begins to increase and when it reaches a stable plateau, showing that success emerges earlier for simpler reference circuits, whereas more complex ones require longer training. Furthermore, the policies for different circuits are interdependent, which contributes to the fluctuations in the success rate curves.

This interpretation is also consistent with the success rates shown in Fig. 6b, specifically for the agent trained without dead-loop mitigation, where the agent is unable to obtain good-fitting ECMs for spectra generated from the most complex reference cir-cuits (circuits 4 and 5). Beyond emphasizing the role of dead-loop mitigation, this result also suggests that policies associated with more complex circuit topologies are harder to learn. These results reveal an opportunity to further improve the learning efficiency of the agent. In the current training approach, spectra are sampled uniformly from the training set at the start of each episode, providing roughly equal experience across all cir-cuit complexities. This leads to an imbalance in learning, where policies for simpler circuits are acquired quickly, whereas those for more complex circuits require substantially longer training to achieve reliable performance. More targeted sampling strategies could help mitigate this imbalance and improve overall learning efficiency by providing the agent with more experience to learn policies associated with more complex circuit topologies. 

3.4 Demonstration on experimental data 

While the preceding results demonstrate the performance of the trained agent on synthetic datasets, evaluation on experimental EIS data is essential for illustrating the practical utility of the Au-toREC platform and the agent trained using it. Unlike simulated spectra, experimental measurements include noise, measurement variability, and unmodeled physical effects, thereby providing a more stringent test of the agent’s generalization. Accordingly, this part of the study should be interpreted as a stress test of how the trained agent and the AutoREC workflow perform on real-world, previously unseen spectra, rather than as an evidence that the broader problem of autonomous ECM generation from experimental EIS data has been fully resolved. From this per-spective, the experimental results are intended both to reveal the current strengths and limitations of the trained agent and to illus-trate how AutoREC can support the deployment and analysis of RL-based ECM generation in practical applications. For evaluation on the experimental spectra, we suggest running the RL agent for the full episode length up to a fixed maximum number of actions, without early termination. The complete tra-jectory of circuit modifications generated during each episode can then be analyzed, and a candidate ECM can be selected from that trajectory. For experimental data no reference circuit exists to guide the selection. Thus, the ECM is chosen based on how well the suggested circuit fits the EIS data, e.g., by selecting the model with the lowest χ2. Other considerations can also be incorpo-rated when selecting the final ECM, such as alternative fit-quality metrics, circuit complexity, or domain-specific judgment. This trajectory-based evaluation avoids committing to a predefined stopping threshold and instead captures the best model identified during the agent’s search. Additional rationale for this evaluation strategy is provided in the SI. Using this strategy, we showcase the agent’s performance on di-verse electrochemical systems, including battery impedance data and spectra from corrosion, oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and CO 2 reduction systems 16 . These systems span distinct elec-trochemical mechanisms and expected ECM structures, allowing assessment of the agent’s generalization across a broad range of practical scenarios. The corresponding normalized Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. 9, along with a UMAP projection comparing these experimental data with the training set.  

> 10 | 1–14 JournalName ,[year],[vol.],

(b) (a) (c) Fig. 9 Illustration of the experimental EIS datasets used to evaluate the trained agent. (a) Normalized Nyquist plots of battery impedance spectra considered in this study. (b) Normalized Nyquist plots of impedance spectra from corrosion, OER, and CO 2 reduction systems. (c) UMAP projection as a comparison between these experimental data and the training set. 

Relative to the synthetic training data, the experimental spec-tra retain some familiar features but also exhibit noticeable differ-ences. For example, the battery spectra exhibit a semicircle with a diffusion tail on the Nyquist plot, similar to reference circuit 2, yet many have flatter and broader semicircles that reach lower nor-malized −Im (Z) values near the end and diffusion lines that rise at a steeper angle. In the CO 2 spectrum, overlapping semicircles give the appearance of a single semicircle. These observations are supported by the UMAP embedding, where the experimental spectra lie near the edges of the training clusters, indicating that they share some structure with the training data while also ex-hibiting distinct features. Overall, these experimental data push the boundaries of the agent’s capabilities. As a consequence, the trained agent shows mixed performance on the experimental data, and the resulting ECMs should there-fore be interpreted with appropriate caution. For the battery spec-tra, the agent is able to identify good-fitting ECMs in approxi-mately 65 .5% of cases, indicating reasonable but less reliable per-formance compared to the synthetic data. Even among the suc-cessful cases, the quality of the fit varies across spectra; results for battery spectra are provided in the SI. This variability is further illustrated by representative results across the battery and other electrochemical systems shown in Fig. 10. For example, the suggested ECMs for the representative battery and corrosion spectra capture the impedance response ac-curately. The proposed ECM for the OER spectrum similarly re-produces most of the response, with only a modest discrepancy at low frequency. In contrast, the ECM identified for the CO 2 re-duction spectrum shows weaker agreement with the experimental (a) Battery (b) Corrosion (d) CO2 reduction (c) OER    

> Fig. 10 Nyquist plots for experimental EIS spectra (orange lines) with the impedance response predicted by the RL agent’s selected ECM (blue lines). Results are shown for (a) battery half-cell, (b) corrosion, (c) oxy-gen evolution reaction (OER), and (d) CO 2reduction systems. The dis-played ECMs correspond to the best-performing models identified based on fitting metric χ2.

data, highlighting a more challenging case. Furthermore, the suggested ECMs also vary in apparent com-plexity across these experimental spectra. For the OER spectrum, for example, the suggested ECM resembles topologies associated with one of the circuits proposed for synthetic EIS data corre-sponding to reference circuits 2 and 3, but now includes three CPEs, a combination that was not previously suggested by the agent for the synthetic data. This modification indeed helps cap-ture a small, overlapping semicircle in the high-frequency regime (bottom left). In this case, the result illustrates an advantage of the RL-based formulation, in which the agent can propose circuit structures beyond a fixed set of predefined classes. In contrast, for the CO 2 spectrum, the agent identifies only a relatively simple ECM, even though a more complex topology, e.g., with three Randles-type elements, could potentially provide better agreement with the EIS data. These limitations in experi-mental performance are a consequence of the lack of diversity and coverage in the training data used to develop the agent for this demonstration. For instance, while the training set contains spec-tra with three Randles-type elements (reference circuit 5), these spectra generally exhibit distinct semicircles and do not include cases with substantial overlap. Similarly, differences between the experimental battery spectra and the corresponding subset of the training data highlight additional gaps in coverage. This limita-tion is also reflected in the embedding space, where the training data form well-separated clusters while some experimental spec-tra may lie between them, indicating subtler or overlapping fea-tures that blur the distinctions between typical circuit responses. JournalName ,[year],[vol.], 

> 1–14 | 11

Thus, improving the reliability of the agent on experimental data require increasing the diversity and coverage of the training set, particularly by including spectra with subtle and transitional features. Exposing the agent to a broader range of spectral char-acteristics could improve its ability to handle intermediate cases and, in turn, increase its reliability on experimental data. 

# 4 Discussion 

4.1 Strengths of the current formulation 

The results presented in Secs. 3.2–3.4 demonstrate the potential of the RL agent developed in this demonstration for generating ECMs from EIS spectra. Quantitatively, the agent achieves suc-cess rates exceeding 99 .6% across various synthetic EIS spectra (see Fig. 6b), demonstrating that the agent can reliably learn ef-fective policies within the synthetic setting considered here. Eval-uation on experimental data further shows that the agent can, in many cases, propose good-fitting ECMs for diverse systems, in-cluding battery cells, corrosion, OER, and CO 2 reduction. These results are particularly encouraging because the experimental spectra were not only unseen during training, but also contain non-idealized features that are absent from the synthetic training set, such as compressed or overlapping semicircles. They there-fore suggest that the trained agent can transfer some of what it learned from synthetic data to more realistic spectra, although the resulting ECMs should still be interpreted with appropriate caution. Another practical advantage of the RL formulation is that it en-ables a more directed exploration of the circuit topology space, thus improving efficiency in navigating the search space. Rather than modifying the circuit arbitrarily, the agent learns mutation sequences that progressively build toward good-fitting ECMs. As illustrated by the representative trajectory in Fig. 7, the agent first establishes a useful structural backbone by introducing parallel branches and then refines that structure to capture the relevant spectral features. Thus, the learned policy does not merely search the topology space exhaustively, but instead exploits its structure to navigate toward promising circuit configurations more effec-tively. Furthermore, an important feature of the RL formulation is that training does not require labeled ECMs; only the impedance spectra are needed. Rather than learning to reproduce human-assigned circuit classes, the agent learns through interaction with the environment and reward feedback. This removes the need for labor-intensive manual labeling, which can be subjective and may bias the space of candidate models. As a result, the framework re-duces the burden of dataset curation while allowing the agent to learn directly from the impedance response itself. The RL formulation also does not restrict the agent to pre-defined circuit classes. Instead, the agent explores the circuit-topology space directly to adaptively construct the ECM rather than selecting from a fixed library of reference circuits. As a re-sult, on the synthetic data, the agent is able to identify ECMs that reproduce the impedance response well even when their topology differs from that of the reference circuits. This flexibility also al-lows the agent to move beyond the limited set of circuit topologies represented in the training set and construct candidate ECMs that better accommodate subtle spectral features in the experimental spectra. For example, in the OER case shown in Fig. 10c, the agent proposes an ECM that resembles one of the suggested ECMs for reference circuits 2 and 3, but with three CPEs. This mod-ification allows the agent to capture the subtle high-frequency semicircular feature and produce a good overall fit. In this sense, the formulation shifts the learning problem away from reproduc-ing human-assigned circuit classes and toward automated gener-ation of candidate circuit models that reproduce the measured re-sponse. More broadly, this ability to search beyond predefined cir-cuit libraries suggests that RL-based ECM generation may provide a practical foundation for more adaptive, data-driven construc-tion and screening of candidate ECMs for unseen electrochemical systems. 

4.2 Limitations of the current formulation 

At the same time, the results reveal several limitations of the agent formulation used in this demonstration—not of the Au-toREC platform itself. First, in the synthetic-data setting, the agent sometimes proposes circuits that contain additional com-ponents relative to the reference circuits without significantly im-proving the fit (see Fig. 6c). Although no such reference is avail-able for the experimental data, similar behavior may also occur there and should be considered when interpreting the proposed ECMs. More broadly, good agreement with the impedance data should not by itself be taken as evidence that the recovered ECM is uniquely correct or physically definitive. In its current form, the agent should therefore be viewed as a tool for automated candidate-model generation rather than a method for guaranteed mechanistic identification. Furthermore, while additional low-impact elements may have little effect on fit quality, they increase model complexity and may lead to misleading physical interpreta-tions of the underlying electrochemical processes. Addressing this limitation will require better postprocessing tools to simplify low-impact elements, together with reward formulations that treat circuit complexity in a more principled way. Such improvements may, in turn, promote a better balance between model expressiv-ity and interpretability in data-driven model construction. Furthermore, the evolution of the success rates during train-ing reveals an imbalance in the agent’s learning dynamics across circuit topologies of different complexity (see Fig. 8). The agent learns effective policies for simpler topologies relatively early in training because generating good-fitting ECMs in these cases re-quires only a few mutations and exploration within a smaller search space, so the corresponding policies are simpler and can be learned with fewer training experience. In contrast, policies for more complex circuits involve longer mutation sequences, often depend on policies for simpler circuits, and require exploration of a broader search space, making them harder to learn and more demanding in terms of training experience. As a result, these cir-cuits require substantially longer training before the agent iden-tifies effective policies. Given the data-driven nature of RL train-ing, such disparity could potentially be mitigated by increasing the agent’s exposure to more complex topologies, for example  

> 12 | 1–14 JournalName ,[year],[vol.],

through a targeted sampling strategy that increases their repre-sentation in the replay buffer. Incorporating such strategy into RL training could improve overall learning efficiency by providing more balanced exposure across topologies of different complex-ity. Finally, the experimental EIS examples reveal that real spectra often contain subtle, non-idealized features, such as compressed and overlapping semicircles, as well as variations in the diffusion tail (see Fig. 10). In contrast, the current agent is trained on synthetic data with more distinct spectral features and clearer separation between responses associated with different circuit topologies (see Fig. 5). As a result, the training data do not ad-equately represent spectra with subtle, overlapping, or interme-diate features, and the agent may therefore fail either to identify an ECM of sufficient complexity or to find a good-fitting ECM at all. By diversifying the training data, particularly to include spec-tra with subtle features and transitions between circuit topolo-gies, the agent would gain exposure to these more challenging responses during training. Consequently, such dataset would not only broaden the range of spectra the agent can handle, but also improve its robustness and reliability on experimental data. Overall, these limitations outline a clear path toward develop-ing more reliable RL agents for ECM generation within AutoREC through improved postprocessing tools, more principled reward design, more targeted allocation of training experience, and train-ing datasets that better reflect the diversity of experimental EIS spectra. They also highlight broader considerations for RL prob-lems in which reliability is shaped by reward design, experience allocation, and the coverage of the training distribution. 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced AutoREC, an open-source Python li-brary for developing and deploying RL agents for autonomous ECM generation from EIS data. Within this framework, ECM con-struction is formulated as a sequential decision-making problem, in which the agent iteratively modifies circuit topologies to im-prove agreement with the measured impedance response. Fur-thermore, AutoREC provides tools for analyzing generated cir-cuits and inspecting the agent’s decision-making process, making it a practical platform for both method development and applica-tion. We demonstrated the utility of AutoREC through a represen-tative agent developed with its default architecture. Using this agent, we showed that AutoREC can support RL-based ECM gen-eration across both synthetic and experimental EIS datasets. On synthetic data, the agent achieves high success rates, demonstrat-ing that the learned policy can effectively navigate the circuit-topology space represented in the training data. On experimental data, the agent is also able to construct reasonable ECMs in many cases, even when the spectra contain subtle or non-idealized fea-tures that are not represented in the synthetic training set. More broadly, these results highlight several appealing aspects of the RL formulation implemented with AutoREC: it enables a more di-rected search over circuit topologies, does not require manually labeled ECM classes, and is not restricted to a fixed library of can-didate circuits. Instead, the agent can discover circuit structures that are useful for reproducing observed impedance responses, making AutoREC a promising platform for more adaptive and data-driven ECM generation, including future integration into au-tomated electrochemical workflows. At the same time, the results also reveal several directions for improving future RL agents developed with AutoREC. These di-rections include reward functions that treat circuit complexity more systematically, training strategies that better allocate ex-perience across tasks of different difficulty, and richer, more di-verse training datasets that better reflect the variability of ex-perimental EIS spectra. Incorporating these improvements could help address the limitations observed for the representative agent used in this demonstration. In particular, they could reduce the tendency to introduce additional circuit elements that do not substantially improve the fit, improve learning efficiency across topologies of different complexity, and improve generalization be-yond the restricted diversity of the synthetic training distribution. More broadly, these directions highlight how AutoREC can sup-port the iterative development of more reliable, efficient, and in-terpretable RL agents for automated ECM generation. Overall, this work establishes AutoREC as a foundation for de-veloping RL-based approaches to autonomous ECM generation from EIS data. By separating the development platform from any single agent implementation, AutoREC creates a space for con-tinued improvement in reward design, training strategies, data generation, and postprocessing, while also enabling more sys-tematic study of how RL can be applied to ECM construction. More broadly, AutoREC suggests a path toward integrating auto-mated model construction into self-driving laboratory workflows, where rapid and adaptive interpretation of impedance data could support more efficient electrochemical characterization, model-guided experimentation, and data-driven decision-making. 

# Author contributions 

A.J.: Writing–original draft, conceptualization, methodology, for-mal analysis, software. Y.K.: Writing–original draft, investiga-tion, formal analysis, software. R.B.: Conceptualization, inves-tigation, resources, project administration. S.M.M.: Conceptual-ization, methodology, investigation. K.V.: Software. Z.S.: Vali-dation. S.M.: Conceptualization, investigation. J.H.-S.: Writing– review & editing, conceptualization, methodology, investigation, formal analysis, validation, resources, funcing acquisition, project administration, supervision. 

# Conflicts of interest 

There are no conflicts to declare. 

# Data availability 

The code and data supporting this article will be made publicly available upon acceptance at GitHub. 

# Acknowledgements 

This research was funded by the Government of Canada under the National Research Council Canada’s Collaborative Science, Tech-nology and Innovation Program (CSTIP) Critical Battery Materi-als Initiative (CBMI). The authors also acknowledge the compu-JournalName ,[year],[vol.], 

> 1–14 | 13

tational resources provided by the Digital Research Alliance of Canada through the Fir cluster. This work was not conducted by, for, or on behalf of Lila Sciences. 

# References 

1 V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, 

Energy & Environmental Science , 2011, 4, 3243–3262. 2 R. M. Ormerod, Chemical Society Reviews , 2003, 32 , 17–28. 3 X. Wei, Y. Liu, J. Dong, S. Cao, J. Xie, N. Chen, F. Xue, C. Wang and W. Ke, Applied Clay Science , 2019, 167 , 23–32. 4 M. Tahir, L. Pan, F. Idrees, X. Zhang, L. Wang, J.-J. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy , 2017, 37 , 136–157. 5 A. Liu, M. Gao, X. Ren, F. Meng, Y. Yang, L. Gao, Q. Yang and T. Ma, Journal of Materials Chemistry A , 2020, 8, 3541–3562. 6 A. Lasia, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy and its Appli-cations , Springer New York, New York, NY, 1st edn., 2014. 7 A. C. Lazanas and M. I. Prodromidis, ACS Measurement Science Au , 2023, 3, 162–193. 8 G. Tom, S. P. Schmid, S. G. Baird, Y. Cao, K. Darvish, H. Hao, S. Lo, S. Pablo-García, E. M. Rajaonson, M. Skreta, N. Yoshikawa, S. Corapi, G. D. Akkoc, F. Strieth-Kalthoff, M. Seifrid and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Chemical Reviews , 2024, 124 ,9633–9732. 9 S. Zhu, X. Sun, X. Gao, J. Wang, N. Zhao and J. Sha, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry , 2019, 855 , 113627. 10 W. Chen, B. Yan, A. Xu, X. Mu, X. Zhou, M. Jiang, C. Wang, R. Li, J. Huang and J. Dong, Journal of Materials Science & Technology , 2025, 209 , 300–310. 11 J. Schaeffer, P. Gasper, E. Garcia-Tamayo, R. Gasper, M. Adachi, J. Pablo Gaviria-Cardona, S. Montoya-Bedoya, A. Bhutani, A. Schiek, R. Goodall, R. Findeisen, R. D. Braatz and S. Engelke, Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 2023, 

170 , 060512. 12 D. Doonyapisut, P.-K. Kannan, B. Kim, J. K. Kim, E. Lee and C.-H. Chung, Advanced Intelligent Systems , 2023, 5, 2300085. 13 V. Bongiorno, S. Gibbon, E. Michailidou and M. Curioni, Cor-rosion Science , 2022, 198 , 110119. 14 S. Zhu, G. Jia, S. Sui, K. Jiang, N. Wang and S. Zheng, Journal of Materials Science , 2025, 60 , 22189–22202. 15 M. Van Haeverbeke, M. Stock and B. De Baets, IEEE Transac-tions on Instrumentation and Measurement , 2021, 70 , 1–12. 16 R. Zhang, R. Black, D. Sur, P. Karimi, K. Li, B. DeCost, J. R. Scully and J. Hattrick-Simpers, Journal of The Electrochemical Society , 2023, 170 , 086502. 17 C. Chen, X. Jiang, K. Huang and W. Xi, 2025 10th Interna-tional Conference on Power and Renewable Energy (ICPRE), 2025, pp. 65–70. 18 T. Schaul, D. Horgan, K. Gregor and D. Silver, Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015, pp. 1312–1320. 19 M. Schönleber, D. Klotz and E. Ivers-Tiffée, Electrochimica Acta , 2014, 131 , 20–27. 20 A. Jaberi, M. A. Sadeghi, R. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Q. Shi, R. Black, Z. Sadighi and J. Hattrick-Simpers, Computational Materials Science , 2026, 268 , 114625. 21 H. v. Hasselt, A. Guez and D. Silver, Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2016, 30 , 2094–2100. 22 V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra and M. Riedmiller, Playing Atari with Deep Re-inforcement Learning , 2013, http://arxiv.org/abs/1312. 5602 , arXiv:1312.5602 [cs]. 23 V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostro-vski, S. Petersen, C. Beattie, A. Sadik, I. Antonoglou, H. King, D. Kumaran, D. Wierstra, S. Legg and D. Hassabis, Nature ,2015, 518 , 529–533. 24 R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An In-troduction , Bradford Books, Cambridge, MA, 1998, p. 103. 25 T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou and D. Silver, Prioritized Ex-perience Replay , 2016, http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05952 ,arXiv:1511.05952 [cs]. 26 S. Huang and S. Ontañón, The International FLAIRS Confer-ence Proceedings , 2022, 35 ,. 27 A. Makogon, F. Kanoufi and V. Shkirskiy, ChemElectroChem ,2024, 11 , e202300738. 28 L. McInnes, J. Healy and J. Melville, UMAP: Uni-form Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimen-sion Reduction , 2020, http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426 ,arXiv:1802.03426 [stat]. 29 T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta and M. Koyama, 

Optuna: A Next-generation Hyperparameter Optimiza-tion Framework , 2019, http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.10902 ,arXiv:1907.10902 [cs]. 30 S. Watanabe, Tree-Structured Parzen Estimator: Understanding Its Algorithm Components and Their Roles for Better Empiri-cal Performance , 2025, http://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11127 ,arXiv:2304.11127 [cs]. 31 F. Berthier, J. P. Diard and R. Michel, Journal of Electroanalyt-ical Chemistry , 2001, 510 , 1–11. 32 S. Buteau, D. C. Dahn and J. R. Dahn, Journal of The Electro-chemical Society , 2018, 165 , A228. 33 J. D. George, W. Brenneis, V. K. Sangwan, D. Meli, H. Kurtz, J. Richards, L. J. Lauhon, J. Rivnay, M. C. Hersam, J. Lopez, M. K. Y. Chan and V. Taylor, ACS Measurement Science Au ,2026, 6, 324–339. 34 M. E. Orazem and B. Ulgut, Current Opinion in Electrochem-istry , 2026, 55 , 101788. 35 M. K. Transtrum, B. B. Machta, K. S. Brown, B. C. Daniels, C. R. Myers and J. P. Sethna, The Journal of Chemical Physics ,2015, 143 , 010901.  

> 14 | 1–14 JournalName ,[year],[vol.],

# Supplementary Material for “AutoREC: A reinforcement learning agent to generate equivalent circuit models for Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy” 

Ali Jaberi, 1, ∗ Yonatan Kurniawan, 2, ∗ Robert Black, 1 Shayan Mousavi M., 1

Kabir Verma, 3 Zoya Sadighi, 1 Santiago Miret, 4 and Jason Hattrick-Simpers 2, †

> 1

Clean Energy Innovation Research Center, National Research Council Canada, Mississauga, ON, Canada 

> 2

Department of Material Science and Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada 

> 3

Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada 

> 4

Lila Sciences, San Francisco, CA, USA 

(Dated: May 1, 2026) 

CONTENTS 

S1. Additional hyperparameter tuning results 1S2. Examples of circuit topology evolution 2S3. Success rate dependency on fit-quality threshold for experimental data 6S4. Agent-proposed ECMs for experimental battery spectra 6

S1. ADDITIONAL HYPERPARAMETER TUNING RESULTS 

The choice of hyperparameter values can substantially influence agent performance, underscoring the importance of hyperparameter tuning. To illustrate this effect, we highlight three representative agents obtained during the tuning process, corresponding to low-, medium-, and high-performing configurations. The hyperparameter values for these agents are listed in Table S1, and their corresponding learning curves are shown in Fig. S1. TABLE S1: Hyperparameter values for the three representative agents shown in Fig. S1, corresponding to low-, medium-, and high-performing configurations. 

Low Medium High Batch size ( ×50) 1 4 2Replay buffer capacity ( ×1,000) 20 14 20 Training update frequency 84 63 14 Target network update frequency ( ×100) 11 8 5Initial ϵ 0.5909 0.7634 0.9491 

ϵ decay 0.8367 0.8676 0.9643 Minimum ϵ 0.0304 0.0510 0.0932 Prioritized replay α 1.0248 0.9657 0.6282 Initial β 0.2648 0.5972 0.1074 Final p 0.8747 1.0400 0.7477 

Analysis of the hyperparameter tuning results reveals that agent performance is sensitive to multiple inter-acting hyperparameters. Across the configurations examined, higher-performing agents generally employed more frequent updates to the training and target network, smaller values of the prioritized replay parameter α, and more exploratory policies, as reflected by higher initial ϵ values and slower ϵ decay. Nevertheless, we also identified config-urations in which excessively frequent training and target network updates resulted in unstable learning dynamics and reduced performance. These observations suggest that agent performance depends not only on individual hyperparameter values, but also on their joint configuration.   

> ∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
> †jason.hattrick.simpers@utoronto.ca

20 2500 5000 7500 10000 

> Trial
> 10
> 5
> 0
> 5
> 10
> Reward

FIG. S1: Learning curves of the three representative agents listed in Table S1, corresponding to low- (blue), medium- (orange), and high-performing (green) configurations.  

> S2. EXAMPLES OF CIRCUIT TOPOLOGY EVOLUTION

In this section, we present representative examples of circuit topology evolution during an episode, illustrating how the RL agent modifies the state at each step to arrive at its final suggested ECM. Figures S2–S6 show representative evolution sequences generated by the trained agent for one sample in the test set from each of the five reference topologies. These figures show that the agent suggests targeted modifications that efficiently capture key features of the EIS data and improve the fit. Interestingly, across all synthetic data, the agent always introduces a parallel connection as the initial modification to the circuit. This heuristic provides a necessary foundation for subsequently constructing a Randles-type subcircuit, which is an important feature present across the synthetic spectra. Beyond this initial step, the subsequent modifications vary across spectra, yet all examples ultimately lead to well-fitting ECMs. 

FIG. S2: Circuit evolution proposed by the trained RL agent during an episode for a representative EIS sample with a single Randles-type element (reference circuit 1). 3

FIG. S3: Circuit evolution proposed by the trained RL agent during an episode for a representative EIS sample with a single Randles-type element and a Warburg diffusion line (reference circuit 2). 

FIG. S4: Circuit evolution proposed by the trained RL agent during an episode for a representative EIS sample with two Randles-type elements (reference circuit 3). 4

FIG. S5: Circuit evolution proposed by the trained RL agent during an episode for a representative EIS sample with two Randles-type elements and a Warburg diffusion line (reference circuit 4). 5

FIG. S6: Circuit evolution proposed by the trained RL agent during an episode for a representative EIS sample with three Randles-type elements (reference circuit 5). 6 

> S3. SUCCESS RATE DEPENDENCY ON FIT-QUALITY THRESHOLD FOR EXPERIMENTAL DATA

For experimental data, defining success solely based on whether the fitted ECM satisfies a predefined fit-quality threshold requires careful consideration. While a consistent threshold can be determined for synthetic spectra— where the noise characteristics and ground-truth structures are known—such a criterion may be less reliable for experimental measurements. Experimental spectra often contain measurement variability, unknown noise charac-teristics, and unmodeled physical effects that deviate from idealized assumptions. Figure S7 illustrates how the choice of fit-quality threshold influences the observed success rate for experimental battery spectra. Under more lenient thresholds, the reported success rate is higher; however, episodes may terminate prematurely before a structurally appropriate circuit has been fully developed. For example, a single Randles-type element may satisfy a relaxed threshold while failing to capture additional spectral features, such as diffusion tails, present in the data. As the threshold is tightened, fewer episodes satisfy the termination criterion, resulting in a lower reported success rate. Nevertheless, the ECMs obtained under stricter thresholds often capture additional spectral characteristics, indicating improved descriptive fidelity despite the reduced success rate. At the same time, enforcing an overly strict threshold may encourage the introduction of additional circuit elements, potentially leading to unnecessarily complex ECMs. These observations highlight an inherent trade-off among threshold selection, fit quality, and structural complexity, suggesting that success rate defined solely by a fit-quality threshold (here chosen as χ2thresh ) may not fully characterize the agent’s behavior on experimental data. 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 1 

> 2threshold
> Stricter condition
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Success rate (%)

FIG. S7: The dependence of the success rate on the experimental battery data on the χ2 threshold for early termination of an episode. An alternative evaluation strategy is to allow each episode to proceed until the predefined maximum number of actions is reached, regardless of whether a fit-quality threshold has been satisfied. The resulting full trajectory of ECM modifications can then be examined, and an appropriate stopping point selected based on fit quality, structural complexity, or other domain-specific considerations. This approach avoids dependence on a fixed termination criterion and offers additional flexibility in interpreting the agent’s behavior. The choice between threshold-based termination and full-trajectory analysis therefore depends on the desired balance between automated decision-making and expert-informed judgment.  

> S4. AGENT-PROPOSED ECMS FOR EXPERIMENTAL BATTERY SPECTRA

In this section, we present the ECMs suggested by the trained agent used for demonstration on the battery data, along with the corresponding Nyquist plots comparing the impedance spectra predicted by the proposed ECMs with the measured data, as shown in Fig. S8. We restrict our discussion to cases in which the agent-proposed ECMs capture both the semicircular feature and the diffusion tail in the impedance spectra, which represent 65 .5% of the total battery spectra. For the remaining cases, the agent is unable to produce ECMs that capture both features; at best, the proposed ECM reproduces only a single semicircular feature. 7

FIG. S8: ECMs proposed by the RL agent for the battery spectra, together with the corresponding predicted impedance spectra.