Title: EMSpice 3: Full-chip Temperature-Aware Multiphysics Electromigration and IR-Drop Analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10743v2

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 00:34:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
> 1

# EMSpice 3: Full-chip Temperature-Aware Multiphysics Electromigration and IR-Drop Analysis 

Haotian Lu Student Member, IEEE , Sheldon X.-D. Tan Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —We present EMSpice 3 , a full-chip temperature-aware multiphysics framework for coupled electromigration (EM), thermomigration (TM), and IR-drop analysis for EM failure assessment and lifetime estimation of power-grid net-works. It combines extracted netlists, a configurable parameter file, and optional chip-level thermal maps in a unified flow supporting temperature-aware immortality screening, transient EM/TM stress simulation with iterative resistance updates, and optional Monte Carlo lifetime analysis. To accelerate large-tree simulation, an extended rational Krylov reduction method is integrated with no accuracy loss, and the framework seamlessly interfaces with Synopsys ICC and Fusion Compiler for full-chip studies. Experiments on six benchmark designs show that realistic spatial thermal maps materially affect EM reliability even when the average temperature is unchanged: equal-average thermal profiles produce more than 70% TTF spread for the RISC-V core and nearly 50% for the ARM Cortex-A logic core, demonstrating that average or peak temperature alone is insufficient for reliable sign-off. Krylov acceleration reduces runtime by 1.18 ×–1.50 × across all designs. Monte Carlo analysis reveals strong design-dependent variation sensitivity: under 20% variation in atomic diffusivity κ(x) and critical stress, the RISC-V core exhibits ≈25% TTF coefficient of variation, whereas the ARM Cortex-A logic core shows only ≈0.03%. These results demonstrate that EMSpice 3 enables practical, map-aware, and workload-aware full-chip EM reliability assessment. 

Index Terms —Electromigration, IR-drop, Thermomigration, Full-chip reliability 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Electromigration (EM) remains a major reliability concern in advanced copper-based VLSI circuits as technology scaling increases current density while shrinking interconnect dimen-sions. Traditional single-wire methods such as Black’s equa-tion and Blech’s limit are widely used but overly conservative for complex networks. Physics-based methods that solve Ko-rhonen’s equation more accurately still largely neglect realistic spatial temperature distributions in both EM degradation and IR-drop analysis. EM is driven by the momentum transfer from conducting electrons to metal atoms. As atoms migrate away from the cathode, tensile stress builds there, while compressive stress accumulates near the anode. This stress gradient opposes the current-driven atomic flux through stress migration and continues to evolve until equilibrium is reached. If the tensile stress exceeds a critical threshold, void nucleation and subse-quent growth occur, increasing wire resistance and eventually causing circuit failure. In addition to current-induced migra-tion, temperature gradients caused by Joule heating or active devices can drive atomic transport from hot to cold regions, leading to thermomigration (TM). 

Haotian Lu and Sheldon X.-D. Tan are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521 USA This work is supported in part by NSF grants CCF-2007135 and CCF-2305437. 

Classical EM models, such as those of Black [1] and Blech [2], are therefore limited for modern full-chip reliability analysis. Korhonen et al. [3] introduced a physics-based partial differential equation (PDE) model for stress evolution in interconnect wires, and a range of analytical and numerical methods have since been proposed to solve it. For example, Cook et al. [4] proposed FastEM , which first discretizes the PDE into linear time-invariant ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and then applies Krylov-subspace reduction to accel-erate the computation. Chen et al. [5] developed analytical solutions that provide further insight into stress evolution in interconnect structures. Most solutions still overlook spatial temperature gradients. Studies show TM can be comparable in magnitude to EM [6], [7], and rising power density and thermal resistance will intensify these effects [8]. Although Joule-heating-aware EM has been studied [9], practical chip-level thermal maps remain rarely incorporated into full-chip EM analysis. Full-chip reliability requires coupled stress-void-IR-drop analysis under realistic thermal fields, not just isolated Ko-rhonen solves. EMSpice [10] moved in this direction, yet two important gaps remain: (1) realistic chip-level thermal maps are not fully incorporated into the EM/IR-drop loop, even though spatial hotspot alignment strongly affects which trees fail and when; and (2) existing flows offer limited guidance on when statistical EM analysis is needed versus deterministic. In this paper, we present EMSpice 3 , a full-chip ther-momigration (TM)-aware electromigration (EM) and IR-drop analysis framework for power-grid reliability assessment. The tool processes extracted power-grid netlists together with a YAML parameter file and, when available, practical chip-level thermal maps. It supports temperature-aware immor-tality screening, transient multiphysics simulation with iter-ative resistance updates, and optional Monte Carlo analysis for variation-aware lifetime estimation. Our numerical results show that realistic spatial temperature maps can change both the number of mortal trees and the network time-to-failure even when the average temperature is unchanged, and that sensitivity to process variation is strongly design-dependent. These observations motivate a more realistic, map-aware, and workload-aware EM sign-off flow. The key contributions of this work are summarized as follows:  

> •

We develop a full-chip TM-aware EM and IR-drop analysis framework coupling temperature-aware immor-tality screening, transient stress evolution, void-induced resistance updates, and repeated IR-drop recomputation, enabling EM reliability assessment at the network level rather than on isolated wires.  

> •

We incorporate practical spatial temperature maps di-rectly into the reliability flow. Different thermal maps with the same mean temperature can produce substan-tially different mortal-tree counts and TTF: equal-average profiles lead to more than 70% TTF spread in the RISC-

> arXiv:2604.10743v2 [cs.AR] 14 Apr 2026 2

V design and nearly 50% in the ARM Cortex-A logic core. Even peak temperature alone can be misleading when hotspots are misaligned with the most electrically stressed trees.  

> •

We integrate an extended rational Krylov acceleration method into the transient solver with three implemen-tation optimizations, achieving 1.18 ×–1.50 × speed-up across six industrial-scale designs while maintaining negligible accuracy loss, with the largest tested design completing in about 31.5 s.  

> •

We show that process-variation sensitivity is strongly regime-dependent. The RISC-V core (19 mortal trees) exhibits ≈25% TTF coefficient of variation under 20% variation in atomic diffusivity κ(x) and critical stress, while the ARM Cortex-A logic core (203 mortal trees) shows only ≈0.03%, providing practical guidance on when statistical analysis is needed.  

> •

We validate EMSpice 3 on six industrial-scale designs, demonstrating that temperature-aware screening avoids unnecessary transient simulation while the combined framework remains practical for full-chip EM sign-off. The remainder is organized as follows. Section II reviews related work; Section III covers the multiphysics background; Section IV describes the EMSpice 3 framework; Section V presents numerical results; and Section VI concludes. II. R EVIEW OF RELATED WORKS 

Early EM work relied on empirical models such as those of Black [1] and Blech [2], which are still widely used but overly conservative for network-level analysis and do not account for realistic thermal effects. Korhonen et al. [3] introduced a physics-based PDE model for stress evolution in interconnect wires, enabling more ac-curate EM analysis at the segment level. As VLSI technology has advanced, however, it has become increasingly important to incorporate both electromigration and thermomigration, because power density and thermal resistance continue to rise in advanced ICs. The role of temperature in EM has historically been un-derestimated, and many models still fail to capture dynamic thermal conditions across an operating chip. Studies by Chen and Tan [7] and Abbasinasab et al. [6] highlight the importance of accurate temperature modeling for wire mortality and metal migration. More recent EM/TM work, including that of Kavousi and Chen [9] and Lamichhane et al. [11], moves toward temperature-aware EM analysis, but practical chip-level thermal maps remain only partially integrated into the reliability loop. More recently, the open-source EM analysis tool PROTON was proposed in [12]. Like EMSpice, PROTON uses finite differences for stress analysis, but it relies on an external commercial simulator for IR-drop analysis and therefore does not capture the same integrated EM/IR-drop interaction. In addition, PROTON does not include an immortality screen to filter out EM-immune wires before transient simulation. Overall, while these tools offer more realistic EM analysis than classical empirical models, they still do not fully account for Joule heating and the resulting thermomigration effects in both screening and transient stress analysis. III. M ULTIPHYSICS MODELING FOR EM AND IR DROP ANALYSIS 

A. Temperature modeling 

The importance of temperature in electromigration (EM) analysis has historically been underestimated. As very-large-scale integration (VLSI) technology continues to scale, how-ever, temperature has become a critical factor in metal mi-gration [13], [6]. Accurate temperature modeling is therefore essential for realistic prediction of wire mortality and stress evolution. Starting from the first law of thermodynamics, the time-dependent thermal behavior in solids is described by the following equation [14]:      

> ρmcp
> ∂T ∂t +∇q=Q(1)

Here, cp represents the specific heat capacity, ρm denotes the mass density, q = −k∇T is the heat flux defined by Fourier’s law, and Q = Qjh + Qconn encompasses the components of Joule heating and heat convection, where Qjh = j2ρ and 

Qconn = k(T − T0)/Γ2. The thermal characteristic length, Γ,depends on the geometry and topology of the environment, and it is calculated as [6]:   

> Γ2=tcu tILD
> kcu
> kILD
> (2)

In this context, tcu and kcu refer to the thickness and thermal conductivity of the wire, respectively, and tILD and kILD 

refer to the thickness and conductivity of the dielectric. Under stationary conditions, Eq. (1) simplifies to:         

> k∇2T−(j2ρ+k(T0−T)/Γ2) = 0 (3)

Eq. (3) can be solved numerically by finite differences (FDM) or finite elements (FEM) to obtain the spatial temperature dis-tribution. The temperature profile along a single wire, subject to boundary conditions T (−L/ 2) = T1 and T (+ L/ 2) = T2,is given by [6], [15]:                  

> T(x) = T0+Tm
> "
> 1−cos  x
> Γ
> 
> cos  L
> 2Γ
> #
> +Tn
> "
> 1−sin  x
> Γ
> 
> sin  L
> 2Γ
> #
> (4)

Here, Tm = j2ρΓ2/k cu is the symmetric (Joule-heating) temperature rise and Tn = ( T1 − T2)/2 is the antisymmet-ric (boundary-asymmetry) component. Prior approaches often assume static boundary temperatures T1 and T2 for the whole chip [9], [11], which fails to capture the spatially varying thermal landscape of an operating die. EMSpice 3 retains the model of Eq. (4) but computes boundary conditions per tree. When an external thermal map is provided, via-node temperatures are read from the map and interpolated to each tree’s endpoints; unconstrained endpoint nodes are solved in tridiagonal thermal blocks. Without an external map, the tool falls back to Joule-heating-only mode using the ambient reference T0. After per-tree endpoints are resolved, Eq. (4) is evaluated along every branch under the local current density, yielding a full per-tree temperature profile for downstream TM-aware screening and transient simulation. 

B. Steady-state-stress-based screening 

In EMSpice 3 , the primary immortality screen is a one-shot steady-state stress analysis on the original netlist. This screening step is optional and is performed before the transient EM/TM simulation begins. Its purpose is not to declare failure directly, but to identify the wires and trees that require transient follow-up. As shown later in Section V, this screening approach does not account for the full interaction among trees over the entire EM aging process. As a result, it can identify only a subset of the truly immortal wires. Any wire that is not screened out still requires transient follow-up to determine its actual mortality. Even so, the screening remains useful in design exploration 3

because it removes clearly immortal trees before the expensive transient stage. For the non-TM-aware case, the screening flow first extracts the trees from the original power-grid netlist and runs the IR-drop solve to obtain the branch current densities. The original tree geometry is then combined with these current densities to build the steady-state tree set. For each tree, EMSpice 3 solves the steady-state form of the stress equation and samples the resulting hydrostatic stress on the same branch-local stress grid used by the transient solver. A branch is classified as requiring transient follow-up when any finite sampled node stress on that branch exceeds the critical stress σcrit . Otherwise, the branch is classified as immortal. A tree requires transient follow-up when at least one of its branches does; otherwise, the entire tree is screened out as immortal. For the TM-enabled case, the flow first performs the one-time thermal analysis described above. The resulting tempera-ture field is then used in the same steady-state stress solve, now with thermomigration-aware matrix stamping. The classifica-tion rule remains unchanged: branches and trees are screened according to whether their maximum finite steady-state stress exceeds σcrit . In this sense, the TM flow differs only in the thermal field that enters the steady-state stress solve; the screening output is still reported as immortal wires/trees and wires/trees that require transient analysis. This steady-state criterion is consistent with the implemen-tation in EMSpice 3 because it directly measures the stress state that drives void nucleation, while avoiding the need to infer mortality from an intermediate voltage criterion. The screen therefore acts as a physics-based preclassification step that reduces the transient workload without labeling all non-immortal branches as already failed. 

C. IR-Drop in VLSI interconnects 

IR drop is increasingly important in modern designs because rising wire resistance degrades on-chip power delivery. As fabrication technologies shrink and current density increases, the dimensions of the power-carrying wires also decrease. In the context of EM analysis, which evolves over days or months, the electrical potential distribution can be treated as quasi-static [10]. It is therefore governed by the strong form of the Laplace equation:                       

> ∇ ·
> 1
> ρ(ϕ)∇u
> 
> = 0 in ΩL(5)
> u=guon ∂ΩL∩Γu(6) ⃗n·1
> ρ(ϕ)∇u=gjon ∂ΩL∩Γj(7)

where ρ(ϕ) represents the copper resistivity influenced by the phase field. Γu denotes boundaries with Dirichlet voltage conditions and gu is the imposed voltage source. Γj denotes boundaries with Neumann current-flux conditions and gj is the corresponding current-density source. For full-chip EM analysis, directly solving Eq. (5) is computationally expensive. Instead, we assume uniform current density along each wire segment, extract a resistance network from the power-grid layout, and apply modified nodal analysis (MNA), which gives    

> M(t)u(t) = P I (t)(8)

Here, M (t) denotes the power-grid admittance matrix, which changes over time as wire resistances degrade due to EM. The matrix P ∈ Rb×p maps the p current sources I(t) to the nodal-voltage vector u(t). The resulting nodal voltages and branch currents are then used in both the temperature-aware immortality screen and the transient EM/TM stress solve. 

D. EM stress evolution mechanism 

In copper dual damascene interconnects, the electron wind force drives atoms from the cathode toward the anode. Because the wire is encased in a rigid dielectric, this redistribution generates tensile hydrostatic stress at the cathode and com-pressive stress at the anode. Once the tensile stress exceeds a critical threshold, a void nucleates. Physics-based models [16], [17] characterize the subsequent EM failure process through three sequential phases: nucleation ( tnuc ), incubation ( tinc ), and growth ( tgrowth ). During nucleation, stress accumulates, potentially leading to void formation at critical stress levels at cathode nodes. In the incubation phase, void growth occurs without resistance changes. The growth phase begins when the void reduces the cross-sectional area of the via, causing current to pass through a higher resistive barrier, changing the wire resistance. This phase may result in early failure (open circuit) or progressive resistance increase up to a predefined threshold (e.g., 10% change). The total time to failure (TTF) is the sum of these three phases:        

> T T F =tnuc +tinc +tgrowth (9)

1) Void nucleation phase: The nucleation phase of the electromigration-thermomigration (EM-TM) process marks the initial period up to the point where a void forms within the interconnect structure being analyzed. This phase begins with an inherent residual stress within the system. The evolution of EM stress, σ, driven by the combined effects of electromigration (EM), stress migration (SM), and thermomigration (TM), is effectively modeled through the application of Korhonen’s equation [18]:        

> ∂σ ∂t =∂∂x
> 
> k(x)
> ∂σ ∂x −eZρj
> Ω−Q
> ΩT∂T ∂x
> 
> (10)

Here, k(x) = κ(x) = Da(T (x)) BΩ/(kB T (x)) represents diffusivity, where Da = D0 exp( −Ea/k B T ) is the atomic diffusion coefficient, D0 a constant, and Ea the activation energy for EM. The transient hydrostatic stress evolution, 

σ(x, t ), during the nucleation phase of a general interconnect structure is governed by the Korhonen equation:                         

> PDE: ∂σ ∂t =∂∂x
> 
> κ(x)
> ∂σ ∂x −S−M
> 
> ,t > 0(11) BC: κ(xb)∂σ ∂x x=xb
> −S−M
> !
> = 0 ,0< t < t nuc (12) IC: σ(x, 0) = σT(13)

In these equations, S = eZρj  

> Ω

represents the EM flux and 

M = Q 

> ΩT∂T ∂x

the TM flux. κ(x) = Da(T (x)) BΩ/(kB T (x)) 

indicates position-dependent diffusivity due to non-uniform temperature, with Da = D0 exp( −Ea/(kB T (x))) as the atomic diffusion rate, σT the initial thermally induced residual stress, and xb marking the block terminals. 

2) Void incubation phase: When the stress reaches a critical threshold at tnuc , a void forms. Nevertheless, the interconnect resistance remains largely unchanged because the void has not yet consumed the critical volume of the via cross-section. Typically, the void nucleates at or near a terminal node when stress reaches this critical point. At this juncture, the normal component of stress at the void boundary is generally zero as shown in Fig. 1. To model this, we consider the effective thickness of the copper-void boundary, δ, as infinitesimally 4

Fig. 1: Stress distribution with void 

small. We then establish the stress gradient between the zero-stress void surface and the adjacent metal as indicated in [19], [20]:        

> ∂σ ∂x x=xnuc
> =σ(xnuc , t )
> δ,tnuc < t < ∞(14)

In the above expression, xnuc represents the location where the void nucleates along the boundary, and δ denotes the thickness of the void interface. The volume of the void, Vv (t), in a multi-segment wire is calculated based on the stress distribution throughout the remaining wire sections. This volume satisfies the atom conservation equation, which is expressed as follows:     

> Vv(t) = −
> Z
> ΩL
> σ(t)
> BdV (15)

where B is the effective bulk elastic modulus of the wire. This relationship is derived from the principles of atom conservation across different segments of the wire as outlined in [19], [20]. Here ΩL represents the volume of the remaining interconnect wire, and V denotes the total volume of the wire, defined by V = W × h × l, where W is the width of the wire, 

h is its thickness, and l is its length. It is important to note that Eq. (15) applies equally during the void growth phase. The period of incubation is defined by the interval tnuc <t < t inc , where the void volume Vv (t) remains below the critical volume Vcrit :   

> Vv(t)< V crit (16)

In this context, Vcrit is dependent primarily on the cross-sectional area of the wire. In a one-dimensional scenario, the width of the wire W is used as the critical dimension rather than the volume, marking the end of the incubation phase as resistance begins to change. This usage arises because W ≥ h,and the void will consume the entire cross-section of the wire once it expands to the width W . Fig. 1 illustrates the stress dynamics in a wire during the incubation phase. The stress at the cathode rapidly drops to zero, while the anode stress gradually declines until it stabilizes. This decline fosters void growth, driven by the accumulation of negative stress as described by Eq. (14). The void volume reaches saturation when the stress stabilizes. During the incubation phase, the void volume remains insufficient to obstruct the via’s cross section and stays below the critical volume. At the termination of the incubation phase, a void will encompass the entire cross section of the via, potentially leading to either an early or a late failure of the wire [21]. Early failures are common in structures where vias are placed above lines. Here, the void obstructs the via, severing the connection to the upper layer, which consists of non-conductive materials like Si 3N4. This results in a failure at the close of the incubation phase. Conversely, late failures occur in structures with vias below the lines. In such cases, even when a void reaches a critical size within a via-below line, current may still traverse the barrier layer, leading to an increase in resistance during the growth phase [10]. 

3) Void growth phase: During the void growth phase, the void continues to expand and wire resistance begins to change measurably, distinguishing this phase from the incubation phase. This resistance increase arises because the electrical current is forced to traverse a highly resistive barrier layer, often composed of Ta/TaN, whose resistivity is significantly greater than that of Cu. The change in wire resistance during this phase can be approximately expressed as [10]:           

> ∆R(t) = Vν−Vcrit
> W H
> ρTa
> hTa(2 H+W)−ρCu
> HW
> 
> (17)

Here, ρTa and ρCu represent the resistivities of the barrier material (Ta/TaN) and copper, respectively. W denotes the width of the wire, H refers to the thickness of the copper, and hT a is the thickness of the barrier layer. 

4) Finite-difference transient formulation: Korhonen’s equation, including the EM, SM, and TM terms in Eq. (11), is solved by a finite-difference transient formulation on each multi-segment interconnect tree, similar to [10]. After finite-difference discretization, the PDE in Eq. (11), together with its boundary conditions (BCs) and initial condition (IC), is transformed into the linear descriptor system       

> C˙σ(t) = Aσ(t) + Bj(t)−D
> σ(0) = [ σ1(0) , σ 2(0) , . . . , σ n(0)] ⊤(18)

In this formulation, σ(t) denotes the stress vector; C and A

are n×n matrices; D is an n×1 vector associated with the TM term; and B is an n × p input matrix, where p is the number of current-density inputs. The initial condition σ(0) includes both the residual stress and, at later outer steps, the stress carried over from the preceding simulation state. Combining Eq. (8), Eq. (15), and Eq. (18), the coupled EM-TM-IR-drop system addressed in this work can be summarized as           

> C˙σ(t) = Aσ(t) + Bj(t)−DVv(t) = −
> Z
> ΩL
> σ(t)
> BdV M(t)u(t) = P I (t)
> σ(0) = [ σ1(0) , σ 2(0) , . . . , σ n(0)] ⊤
> (19)

Eq. (19) summarizes the multiphysics system used to analyze coupled IR drop, void volume, and stress evolution over time. The implementation details are presented in Section IV. IV. EMSpice 3 FRAMEWORK WITH ACCELERATED 

IMPLEMENTATION 

A. Overall EMSpice 3 flow 

Fig. 2 summarizes the overall EMSpice 3 flow. The analysis starts from three inputs: an extracted power-grid netlist, a YAML parameter file containing the material and numerical settings, and an optional thermal map for TM-aware analysis. After parsing these files, the tool can perform an optional steady-state screening pass to prune trees that are already classified as immortal. At each aging step the degraded netlist is partitioned into wire trees; MNA solves the IR-drop problem for nodal voltages and branch current densities, while the thermal field (when enabled) is loaded once and cached. Larger trees are accelerated by the rational Krylov path; smaller trees use backward Euler directly. Updated stress and void states are converted to resistance changes and written back to the netlist for the next outer step. 5Power Grid Netlist                            

> (. pna )
> Simulation Parameters
> (. yml )
> (Optional) Temp. Map
> (.csv)
> Parse & Load Inputs
> Steady -state
> Screening?
> Steady -state Solver
> + Immortality Screen
> YE S
> Stage Netlist + Extract Wire Trees
> NO
> (Optional ) TM Analysis
> w/ temperature field ( cached)
> IR -Drop Solver (MNA)
> →currents & voltages
> Immortality Filter + Tree Dispatch
> Rational Krylov Solver
> (RKSM, order q)
> when n≥max( 3𝑞 ,30 )
> Full -order
> Backward Euler Solver
> when n≤max( 3𝑞 ,30 )
> Tree -wise FDTD Stress Solver
> →stress , v oid nucleation &growth
> Resistance Update
> w/ (early /late failure, via -aware)
> Transient Loop
> (Outer Iterations)
> Outputs: stress, void state, IR -drop ,
> updated netlist, visualization

Fig. 2: Overall algorithmic flow of the proposed EMSpice 3 frame-work 

B. Finite-difference transient stress solver 

The finite-difference transient stress solver combines the current-density data from the IR-drop solution with the tem-perature distribution to solve the discretized Korhonen equa-tion over time. For each tree, the solver updates the hydrostatic stress state, tracks void nucleation and growth, and computes the resulting change in resistance. These resistance updates are then written back to the staged netlist so that the next IR-drop solve reflects the current aging state of the power grid. 

C. Early failure detection via via-aware resistance updates 

Once the FDTD solver has advanced the stress state and updated void positions and lengths, the resulting resistance changes must be written back into the staged netlist before the next IR-drop solve. EMSpice 3 distinguishes two physically distinct failure modes depending on whether the cathode node of the affected tree carries an explicit via connection to a higher metal layer. In the common case, late failure , the void grows within a wire segment but does not fully block an inter-layer current path. The resistance increase is computed incrementally from the fraction of the wire cross-section consumed by the void, and the branch resistance is updated accordingly. When the cathode node of the tree is connected upward through an explicit via resistor to a strictly higher metal layer, however, the growing void can sever the only current path through that via, causing an abrupt open-circuit rather than a gradual degradation. This condition is termed early failure , and the affected branch resistance is set to an open-circuit sentinel value. Correctly identifying early failure requires explicit via in-formation. EMSpice 3 retains all via resistances during PNA-to-SPICE conversion, then parses the netlist for two-terminal resistors connecting nodes on different metal layers. For each tree, the cathode node is resolved from the topology and its upward-layer connectivity is looked up in the resulting via map. In contrast, earlier EMSpice 1/2 [10] dropped vias during conversion and therefore could not distinguish the two failure modes. EMSpice 3 falls back to late-failure treatment when via resistors are absent, preserving backward compatibility. 

D. Treatment of the void nucleation on mid-tree junction nodes 

(a) Spatial stress profile (b) Junction-node stress history 

Fig. 3: Mid-tree void nucleation in the Dual-Port RAM design. Left: stress profile along tree (25-100) over outer timesteps from 2.5×10 6 sto 5.0 × 10 7 s, showing the evolution from a near-zero state to a strong compressive gradient as degradation accumulates. Right: stress history at junction node 220, where the abrupt transition from about 

3.3 × 10 8 Pa tensile stress to about −3.4 × 10 8 Pa compressive stress marks void nucleation; the subsequent saturation confirms that the Robin boundary condition enforces flux decoupling at the interior node without dynamic tree splitting. 

In existing EM simulation frameworks based on the ex-tended Korhonen formulation, void nucleation at an interior node of a wire tree is handled by explicitly splitting the tree into two separate sub-trees at the nucleation point [22]. A zero-flux (homogeneous Neumann) boundary condition is then imposed on each sub-tree at the split boundary, reflecting the physical fact that the void surface carries no net atomic flux. While this approach is physically correct, it requires dynamic bookkeeping: the tree topology must be restructured at every nucleation event, and the system matrices must be reassembled for the resulting sub-trees at each subsequent time step. 

EMSpice 3 avoids tree splitting entirely through a direct application of the Robin boundary condition at the void node. Once a void nucleates at stress-grid node vi, the corresponding row of the assembled stiffness matrix is cleared and replaced with a Robin stencil stamped over every segment incident to 

vi: ∂σ ∂x vi

= σ(vi, t )

δ , t > t nuc , (20) 

where δ is the infinitesimally thin void-surface thickness al-ready used in the post-voiding boundary condition of Eq. (14). Because the stamping loop iterates over all incident segments regardless of their count, the same code path handles terminal nodes, junction nodes, and arbitrary mid-tree interior nodes without any special casing. As δ → 0 the large diagonal coefficient κ/ (∆ x · δ) forces the atomic flux to zero across all branches meeting at vi, effectively decoupling the two sub-trees within a very short simulation time. The decoupling is therefore not instantaneous but is completed in a time period 6

proportional to δ, which is kept negligibly small relative to the simulation time step. This treatment significantly simplifies the implementation: no tree topology changes are performed at runtime, and the matrix assembly routine requires only a localized row replacement rather than a global remeshing. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the Robin-based approach reproduces the same physical boundary condition as the split-tree method while preserving the correctness of the EM stress dynamics. 

E. Rational Krylov subspace acceleration 

For power-grid trees with a large number of finite-difference stress nodes, the backward-Euler solve dominates the per-timestep cost of EM-TM analysis. EMSpice 3 therefore adopts the recently proposed extended rational Krylov sub-space method ( ExtRaKrylovEM ) [23], which projects the n-dimensional stress system onto a much smaller subspace of order q (q ≪ n). This reduces the dominant linear-algebra cost on large trees while preserving high solution accuracy. Compared with the standard extended Krylov method, Ex-tRaKrylovEM uses a shifted resolvent operator to construct the projection basis, which better captures the transient dy-namics of interest and avoids numerical issues associated with near-singular system matrices under Neumann-type boundary conditions. 

1) System formulation and extended rational Krylov sub-space: After finite-difference spatial discretization of the Korhonen equation, the per-tree stress evolution is described by the linear time-invariant system 

C ˙σ(t) = A σ(t) + B j − D, σ(0) = σ0, (21) 

which is the same descriptor form as Eq. (18). In this paper, 

j is assumed constant over one outer EMSpice 3 update, but the thermomigration term satisfies D̸ = 0 in general. Define the constant forcing vector 

f := B j − D. 

Applying the Laplace transform gives 

(sC − A) Σ(s) = Cσ0 + f

s .

Because the input is constant, define eΣ(s) := s Σ(s), so that 

(sC − A) eΣ(s) = sC σ0 + f .

We expand the solution around a shifted frequency s0 = 1 /t s,where ts is a user-supplied shift time (time constant of interest). Define 

Ks0 := s0C − A, Rs0 := K−1 

> s0

,

and let s = s0 + ∆ . Expanding 

eΣ(s0 + ∆) = 

> ∞

X

> k=0

fmk∆k

and matching powers of ∆ yields the compact recurrence 

fmk =



Rs0 (s0Cσ0 + f ) , k = 0 ,Rs0 (Cσ0 − Cfm0) , k = 1 ,

−Rs0 C fmk−1, k ≥ 2.

(22) 

Since j is constant here, no source-moment matching is needed; all higher-order shifted moments propagate only through the operator Rs0 C. This leads to the starting block 

Bs0 :=  Rs0 Cσ0, R s0 f . (23) 

Algorithm 1 Constant-Input Block Rational Krylov Reduction 

Require: System matrices A, C, forcing vector f = Bj −D, initial stress σ0, expansion point s0, reduction order q

Ensure: Projection matrix Vr , reduced matrices Ah, Ch, f h 

> 1:

Form Ks0 ← s0C − A and compute its sparse LU factors  

> 2:

Define the propagation operator M(X) ← K−1 

> s0

CX  

> 3:

Form starting block F0 ← K−1 

> s0

Cσ0, K −1 

> s0

f  

> 4:

Compute thin QR: F0 = V1R0; initialize V ← V1 

> 5:

for j = 1 to q − 1 do  

> 6:

W ← M (Vj ) 

> 7:

for i = 1 to j do  

> 8:

Hij ← V ⊤ 

> i

W 

> 9:

W ← W − ViHij  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Compute thin QR: W = Vj+1 Hj+1 ,j  

> 12:

if ∥Hj+1 ,j ∥F < ε then break  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

Append Vj+1 to V 

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

Ah ← V ⊤AV , Ch ← V ⊤CV , f h ← V ⊤f 

> 17:

return (V, A h, C h, f h)

All shifted response moments therefore lie in the block ratio-nal Krylov subspace 

Kq (Rs0 C, Bs0 ) = range   Bs0 , (Rs0 C)Bs0 , . . . , 

(Rs0 C)q−1Bs0

 . (24) 

An orthonormal projection basis Vr ∈ Rn×r is constructed from this subspace via a block Arnoldi process up to order 

q, as summarized in Algorithm 1. Because s0 is chosen to match the dominant time scale of the simulation, the resulting basis captures the transient dynamics more accurately than a standard (unshifted) Krylov expansion for the same order 

q. Furthermore, computing the resolvent (s0C − A) rather than A−1 directly avoids the near-singularity issue of A under Neumann-type boundary conditions that has been reported for earlier Krylov EM solvers [24]. 

2) Reduced model and time integration: Using the final basis Vr , the reduced matrices are 

Ah = V ⊤ 

> r

AV r , Ch = V ⊤ 

> r

CV r , f h = V ⊤ 

> r

f , (25) 

and the reduced descriptor system 

Ch ˙ˆσ(t) = Ah ˆσ(t) + f h, ˆσ(0) = V ⊤ 

> r

σ0,

is integrated with backward Euler. The full-space stress field is recovered by the lift σ(t) ≈ Vr ˆσ(t).

3) Shift time selection: Rather than specifying s0 directly, 

EMSpice 3 exposes the shift time ts = 1 /s 0, which has the physical interpretation of the time-constant region of greatest interest. An initial estimate is derived from the analytical solution of the 1-D diffusion equation with blocking boundary conditions at both ends. The slowest-decaying eigenmode has eigenvalue λ1 = ( π/L )2, giving the diffusive time constant 

τ = L2

π2κ , (26) 

where L is the wire length and κ is the stress diffusivity. In the EMSpice 3 flow, we set L = Lmax (maximum path length in the tree), reflecting the longer-range void growth along the critical path. In practice, setting ts = τ without further scaling (η = 1 ) achieves less than 1% error in nucleation time at reduction order q = 4 –6 [23]. 7

4) Implementation improvements: Reduction techniques can be very effective for large trees, but they are not uniformly beneficial across all extracted power-grid trees. In practical PDN netlists, many trees are short, nearly straight segments with only one or two branches. These trees are typically very cheap to solve directly: empirical profiling in our implemen-tation shows sub-millisecond runtime for tiny trees and only about 1–3 ms for small-to-medium trees. At that scale, the overhead of reduction process may exceed the numerical solve cost. As a result, we propose three optimizations in EMSpice 3 

to accelerate the basic algorithm: 

Basis caching. The Arnoldi basis Vr and reduced matrices 

(Ah, C h, f h) are determined by the per-tree descriptor system, the shifted starting block, and the shift s0. EMSpice 3 caches the basis in an LRU (least recently used) dictionary, where each entry is keyed by a fingerprint of the tree matrices together with s0. Here, the fingerprint is a short, fixed-length hash value computed from the numerical data of the matrices and shift parameter; it uniquely identifies the input data so that cached results can be efficiently retrieved or invalidated if the inputs change. The expensive sparse LU factorization and Arnoldi iterations run only once per tree; subsequent outer steps retrieve the cached basis at negligible cost. 

Loop-free time stepping for uniform grids. When the inner time grid is uniformly spaced with step ∆t, the backward-Euler recurrence ˆσk = F ˆσk−1 + g (where F =(Ch − ∆t A h)−1Ch and g = ∆t (Ch − ∆t A h)−1f h) is solved without a Python loop. F is eigendecomposed once as F = E diag( λ) E⊤, and all time steps are computed simultaneously via vectorized power-series operations: 

ˆσk = E



λk ⊙ c0 + P 

> j<k

λj ⊙ cg



,

where c0 = E⊤ ˆσ0 and cg = E⊤g. The inner cumulative sum is computed via np.cumsum , making the entire trajectory a sequence of array operations with no per-step overhead. For non-uniform grids, the LU factorization of (Ch − ∆t A h) is cached per unique ∆t and reused across steps. 

Batch lift. The nt × r reduced-space trajectory is lifted to full space in a single BLAS DGEMM : series = ˆZ V ⊤ 

> r

,replacing nt individual O(nr ) matrix-vector products with one cache-friendly O(ntnr ) matrix multiply. 

5) Fallback to backward Euler and dynamic tree selection: 

Not all trees benefit from Krylov reduction. EMSpice 3

therefore applies a dynamic size threshold before invoking the solver. In the implementation, this threshold depends not only on the state dimension n and reduction order q, but also on whether a Krylov basis is already cached and on the number of inner timesteps to be advanced. On a cold solve, the basis construction and shifted sparse factorization are worthwhile only when n is sufficiently larger than q; specifically, the Krylov path is selected when     

> n≥max(3 q, 30) ,(27)

ensuring the full-order system is large enough relative to the reduction order that the setup cost is worthwhile. When the cache is warm, the threshold can be reduced substantially be-cause the expensive setup is skipped. This policy is important in practice: many trees are small enough that direct backward Euler already costs only a few milliseconds, whereas the minority of larger trees benefit from repeated reduced-order solves across outer aging iterations. Small trees therefore fall through to the lightweight full-order path with negligible cost, while the expensive tail of the tree population is accelerated. The accelerated path can also be disabled globally, in which case full backward Euler is used throughout. Even for trees that pass the size threshold, the solver may encounter numerical difficulty (e.g., rank deficiency in the Arnoldi basis or ill-conditioned shift). When this occurs, the tree is transparently re-solved with full backward Euler. Krylov reduction is therefore a best-effort performance op-timization: it accelerates the common case without risk to correctness. V. N UMERICAL RESULTS AND CASE STUDIES 

In this section, we present numerical case studies and comparative evaluations performed with EMSpice 3 . The full toolchain is implemented in Python. All simulations were run on a high-performance Linux server equipped with dual 3.3 GHz Xeon processors and 316 GB of memory. 

A. Case Study I: RISC-V Core 

Our first case study focuses on the power grid of a RISC-V processor core, herein referred to as “RISC”. This design was synthesized and placed-and-routed using the SAED32 (Synopsys 32/28nm Generic) library. The design comprises 9 standard-cell blocks across 11 routing layers, with a total chip area of 104,385.65 μm 2 (≈0.104 mm 2). The RISC power grid spans four metal layers (M1, M2, M7, and M8, interconnected by VIA layers) with a total of 186 trees, 115 maximum branches per tree, and up to 5750 nodes per tree. The finished layout and power grid structure are shown in Fig. 4. All simulations use a base temperature of 353 K (80 ◦C) and a total simulation horizon of 5 × 10 7 s ( ≈1.6 years), with ten outer timesteps of 5 × 10 6 s each.  

> (a) RISC-V core: finished phys-ical layout (b) VDD Power grid structure

Fig. 4: RISC-V core: finished physical layout (left) and extracted power grid structure showing four metal layers (M1, M2, M7, M8) with VIA connections (right). 

We run two scenarios that differ only in their spatial temperature distribution, both with the same 353 K average temperature. 

Case 1 — Baseline external temperature map. The first scenario uses a baseline spatial temperature distribution provided externally as input to EMSpice 3 . As shown in Fig. 6a, this map features a localized hotspot concentrated in the lower-left region of the die, peaking at approximately 355 K while the rest of the chip stays near 351 K. The per-node Joule-heating temperature distribution computed by 

EMSpice 3 under this external map is shown in Fig. 7(a). The steady-state immortality screening identifies 7 trees as immortal before the transient simulation begins. During the subsequent transient FDTD solve, 19 trees nucleate voids by the end of the simulation. The resulting stress distribution and nucleation sites are illustrated in Fig. 8a. The initial maximum IR drop is 6.19% of Vsrc ; it rises to 29.64% by the end of the simulation. The IR-drop 10% failure threshold is crossed at approximately 1.29 × 10 7 s ( ≈5 months); Fig. 8c shows the voltage drop map at t = 2 .50 × 10 7 s. 8

Fig. 5 shows the steady-state stress distribution for Case 1 computed without void nucleation. Without the saturation mechanism, stress accumulates continuously and peak tensile values in the lower-left hotspot far exceed those in Fig. 8a, where void nucleation clamps stress near the saturation thresh-old once flux is interrupted. This comparison highlights the importance of accurately modeling nucleation in coupled EM-TM simulations. 

Fig. 5: Steady-state stress distribution for the RISC-V core (Case 1, baseline external temperature map at 353 K average) computed without void nucleation. Stress accumulates unbounded throughout the simulation, revealing the segments most susceptible to EM degradation prior to any saturation effect. 

Case 2 — Qualcomm measured external temperature map. The second scenario uses a real spatial temperature distribution measured from a Qualcomm SM6225 Snapdragon 680 4G 8-core CPU chip, provided as an external input at the same 353 K average temperature [25]. As shown in Fig. 6b, this map features a broad central hotspot covering a large area of the die, rather than the localized corner hotspot of Case 1. The per-node Joule-heating temperature distribution computed by EMSpice 3 under this external map is shown in Fig. 7(b). Despite the wider heated region, the transient simulation identifies only 16 mortal trees (Fig. 8b), two fewer than Case 1. The final maximum IR drop is 17.26%, substantially lower than the 29.64% of Case 1, and the 10% IR-drop threshold is not crossed until 2.37 × 10 7 s ( ≈9 months), as shown in Fig. 8d. Fig. 6 shows the two input spatial temperature maps. Despite sharing the same 353 K average, they differ funda-mentally: the baseline map (Fig. 6a) has a compact lower-left hotspot peaking at ≈355 K, while the Qualcomm SM6225 measured map (Fig. 6b) distributes heat over a broad central region. Fig. 7 shows the resulting per-node Joule-heating distributions. In Case 1, the external baseline hotspot directly overlaps the highest-current wires in the lower-left, so the two gradients reinforce each other and compound the EM risk for those trees. In Case 2, the Qualcomm ambient peak is not aligned with the highest-current wires, so the combined ther-mal load on the most stressed segments is lower—explaining the fewer mortal trees (16 vs. 19) and later TTF despite the identical average temperature. The spatial pattern of the temperature distribution, rather than its average value, governs EM reliability: the baseline external map concentrates its hotspot over the highest-current trees near the power delivery boundary, aligning the thermal and electrical stress peaks and producing the most severe Joule-heating on those wires (Fig. 7a), while the Qualcomm map spreads ambient heat over a broader central region that                  

> (a) Externally given baseline temperature map (Case 1): lo-calized lower-left hotspot, peak
> ≈355 K, remainder ≈351 K
> (b) Externally given Qualcomm SM6225 measured temperature map (Case 2): broad central hotspot, peak ≈355 K, same 353 K average

Fig. 6: Externally given spatial temperature maps provided as inputs to EMSpice 3 for the two RISC-V core scenarios. Both maps share a 353 K die-average temperature but differ in spatial structure: the baseline map has a compact lower-left hotspot; the Qualcomm measured map spreads heat broadly across the central die area.                       

> (a) Per-node Joule-heating tem-perature distribution (Case 1): in-tense heating along high-current wire segments in the lower-left; external baseline hotspot and Joule gradient reinforce each other
> (b) Per-node Joule-heating tem-perature distribution (Case 2): similar wire-level pattern as Case 1but modulated by the broad Qualcomm ambient, which raises base temperature centrally rather than over the highest-current wires

Fig. 7: Per-node Joule-heating temperature distributions on the RISC-V power grid computed by EMSpice 3 for the two thermal scenarios. Individual wire segments are resolved, showing the spatial correlation between current density and local temperature. In Case 1 the external baseline hotspot directly overlaps the most current-stressed region; in Case 2 the Qualcomm ambient heat does not preferentially load the highest-current power-delivery wires. 

does not preferentially overlap the most stressed wires, leading to fewer mortal trees and a later IR-drop threshold crossing. Tab. I extends the comparison to seven thermal profiles. The mortal tree count varies from 7 (uniform 353 K) to 19 (baseline Joule-heating-derived external map at 353 K), confirming that the spatial structure—not the mean temperature—controls which trees fail. Among the 353 K profiles, TTF spans from 

1.29 × 10 7 s to 2.37 × 10 7 s ( ≈4.9 to 9.0 months), a spread exceeding 70%. Although the uniform profile yields the fewest mortal trees, the baseline 353 K external map produces the shortest TTF, indicating that hotspot alignment with critical current paths can dominate over tree count alone. For a fixed spatial profile, increasing average temperature consistently shortens TTF. 

B. Case Study II: ARM Cortex-A Logic Core 

The second test case focuses on the power grid of an ARM Cortex-A logic core design, herein referred to as “ARMcore”. The design was synthesized and placed-and-routed using the Synopsys Design Compiler with the Synopsys 32/28nm 9

(a) 3D Stress map and nucleation sites (Case 1): 19 mortal trees at 5 × 10 7 s; final stress field predominantly compressive 

(b) 3D Stress map and nucleation sites (Case 2): 16 mortal trees at 5 × 10 7 s; final stress field predominantly compressive 

(c) 3D IR drop map at threshold violation (Case 1): max IR drop 12.86% at t = 2 .50 × 10 7 s

(d) IR drop map at threshold violation (Case 2): max IR drop 11.41% at t = 2 .50 × 10 7 s

Fig. 8: Stress distributions and IR drop maps for the RISC-V core under the two thermal scenarios (external input maps: Fig. 6; Joule-heating distributions: Fig. 7) 

TABLE I: RISC-V core EM results under different thermal profiles (186 trees total). TTF is the time at which the network-wide IR drop exceeds the 10% failure threshold.                                            

> Thermal Profile Avg. Temp (K) Max Temp (K) Mortal Trees TTF (s) Uniform 353 K 353.00 353.00 71.37 ×10 7
> Joule-heating (avg. 320 K) 320.67 345.93 14 2.36 ×10 7
> Joule-heating (avg. 353 K) 353.40 378.66 19 1.29 ×10 7
> Joule-heating (avg. 373 K) 373.55 398.81 18 2.02 ×10 7
> Qualcomm map (avg. 309 K) 309.58 336.90 11 2.36 ×10 7
> Qualcomm map (avg. 353 K) 353.21 380.53 16 2.37 ×10 7
> Qualcomm map (avg. 373 K) 373.36 400.68 16 2.37 ×10 7

Generic Library [26]. The ARMcore power grid spans three metal layers (M1/L11, M8/L18, and M9/L19, connected by VIA layers L21–L28) with a total of 208 trees, a maximum of 218 branches per tree, and up to 10 900 nodes per tree. The supply voltage is 1.2 V. The power grid structure spanning a 

450 × 450 μm die footprint is shown in Fig. 9. All simulations use a base temperature of 353 K (80 ◦C) and a total simulation horizon of 5 × 10 7 s ( ≈1.6 years), with ten outer timesteps of 

5 × 10 6 s each. We again run two scenarios that differ only in their spatial temperature distribution, both with the same 353 K average temperature. 

Case 1 — Joule-heating temperature map. The actual per-node temperature distribution derived from Joule heating is shown in Fig. 10a. Temperatures range from 351 K to 355 K, with higher-temperature nodes distributed throughout the die and concentrated predominantly in the lower-left region and along heavily loaded interconnect paths. The steady-state 

Fig. 9: Power grid structure of the ARM Cortex-A logic core (three metal layers M1, M8, M9 shown together with VIA connections) 

immortality screening identifies only 5 immortal trees; the remaining 203 out of 208 trees require transient follow-up, corresponding to 10 166 individual mortal wire branches. This exceptionally high mortal count reflects the design’s very high current densities throughout the M1 layer, which push nearly every tree far beyond the nucleation threshold even at moderate temperatures. The transient EM simulation confirms that all 203 trees nucleate voids within the simulation horizon. The five immortal trees are all very short wires that do not 10 

nucleate because of their limited length. The resulting stress map and nucleation sites are shown in Fig. 10c, where the ”+” markers indicate the nucleated trees. The initial maximum IR drop is 7.19% of Vsrc ; it rises to 13.00% by the end of the simulation. The 10% IR-drop failure threshold is crossed at approximately 1.23 × 10 7 s ( ≈4.7 months), as shown in Fig. 10e, where the ”+” marker indicates the location of the maximum IR drop at the time of threshold violation. 

Case 2 — Qualcomm measured temperature map. The actual per-node temperature distribution derived from the Qualcomm SM6225 measured map is shown in Fig. 10b. It places a broad central oval hotspot covering roughly half the die area and peaking at ≈355 K, while the peripheral nodes remain near 351 K—a markedly different spatial pattern from the scattered Joule-heating distribution of Case 1. Despite the very different spatial distribution, the transient simulation again identifies 203 mortal trees with the same set of nucleated trees as Case 1 (Fig. 10d). The final maximum IR drop is 14.24%, higher than the 13.00% of Case 1 by the end of the simulation, and the 10% failure threshold is crossed at 

1.49 × 10 7 s ( ≈5.7 months) (Fig. 10f). Both scenarios yield 203 mortal trees and the same nucle-ation sites, yet the Qualcomm map delays IR-drop failure from 

1.23 × 10 7 s to 1.49 × 10 7 s—a 21% longer TTF at the same average temperature. Unlike the RISC-V core, where the two maps changed both mortal-tree count and TTF, here the mortal set is insensitive to the thermal profile while TTF is not. Tab. II confirms this across seven profiles. The mortal count is fixed at 203 in all cases: M1-layer current densities push nearly every tree far above the nucleation threshold regardless of temperature distribution. Nevertheless, TTF spans from 

1.01 × 10 7 s (uniform 353 K) to 1.49 × 10 7 s (Qualcomm 353 K)—nearly 50% spread at the same average temperature. The sweep is also non-monotonic: Joule-heating profiles reach peak temperatures up to 478 K yet fail sooner than the Qualcomm profiles at the same average temperature, because hotspot alignment with electrically stressed wires governs TTF more than any scalar temperature metric. TABLE II: ARM Cortex-A logic core EM results under different thermal profiles (208 trees total). TTF is the time at which the network-wide IR drop exceeds the 10% failure threshold.                                            

> Thermal Profile Avg. Temp (K) Max Temp (K) Mortal Trees TTF (s) Uniform 353 K 353.00 353.00 203 1.01 ×10 7
> Joule-heating (avg. 320 K) 320.49 377.90 203 1.04 ×10 7
> Joule-heating (avg. 353 K) 353.22 456.65 203 1.23 ×10 7
> Joule-heating (avg. 373 K) 373.37 477.81 203 1.23 ×10 7
> Qualcomm map (avg. 309 K) 309.82 362.81 203 1.10 ×10 7
> Qualcomm map (avg. 353 K) 353.45 438.05 203 1.49 ×10 7
> Qualcomm map (avg. 373 K) 373.60 459.43 203 1.49 ×10 7

C. Performance Comparison Across Designs 

To further evaluate the scalability and efficiency of EM-Spice 3 , we tested the tool on a broader set of benchmark designs. Tab. III summarizes the key statistics and runtime results for six designs, including the two case studies above. 

AES new is an AES encoder design, JPEG new is a JPEG encoder design, armcore logic is an ARM Cortex-A logic core design, armcore pad is an ARM Cortex-A pad design, 

dual ram is a dual-port RAM design, and risc core is a RISC-V core design. The PG networks of the six designs were obtained from the Synopsys Fusion Compiler. All designs were synthesized and placed-and-routed using the SAED32 (Synopsys 32/28nm Generic) library. For each design, we report the number of trees, the max-imum number of branches and nodes per tree, the initial and final maximum IR drop (as a percentage of Vsrc ), the corresponding IR-drop time to failure (TTF), the number of mortal wires identified after immortality screening, and the wall-clock CPU time (in seconds) with and without the Krylov-subspace acceleration described in Section IV-E. For the two case-study designs, the listed TTF values correspond to the 353 K Joule-heating runs reported earlier so that the cross-design comparison remains tied to a single operating point. Several observations follow from Table III. The Krylov-based solver consistently reduces runtime, with speedups from 

1.18 × (armcore pad ) to 1.50 × (dual ram ), and the reported Krylov metric error is 0.0% for all six benchmarks. The final IR drop exceeds the initial value for all designs with mortal wires. Notably, risc core shows a dramatic increase from 6.19% to 29.64% despite only 19 mortal wires, underscoring that a few high-current trees can dominate IR-drop degra-dation. armcore pad records zero mortal wires, validating that temperature-aware screening efficiently prunes immortal trees before the transient FDTD stage. Runtimes scale with design complexity: the largest design, armcore logic (208 trees, up to 10,900 nodes), completes in about 31.5 s with Krylov acceleration, while the smallest, dual ram (55 trees), finishes in under 1.6 s, confirming the practical scalability of 

EMSpice 3 .

D. Monte Carlo EM Reliability Analysis 

To quantify the statistical variability of EM-induced time to failure (TTF) arising from manufacturing process variations, we perform Monte Carlo (MC) simulations on both the RISC-V core and the ARM Cortex-A logic core designs. In each MC run, the atomic diffusivity κ(x) and critical stress parameters are randomly perturbed with a coefficient of variation (CoV) of 20%. For each design, 100 independent MC samples are drawn, and the full EMSpice 3 pipeline—immortality screening, transient FDTD simulation, and coupled IR-drop analysis—is re-executed for each sample using the Joule-heating temperature map at 353 K. The 10% IR-drop threshold is used to define the TTF for each run. A run in which the IR drop never exceeds the threshold within the 5 × 10 7 ssimulation horizon is recorded as censored (right-censored). 

RISC-V Core. Fig. 11 shows the TTF histogram for the RISC-V core across 100 MC runs. Of the 100 runs, 98 result in IR-drop failure within the simulation window and 2 are right-censored. The mean TTF among the 98 observed failures is 0.4496 years ( ≈ 1.42 × 10 7 s) with a standard deviation of 0.1132 years, yielding a coefficient of variation of approximately 25%. The distribution is right-skewed with the bulk of samples concentrated between 0.40 and 0.53 years and a single outlier near 1.53 years. The one-sigma bounds (μ ± σ) span from 0.3364 years to 0.5628 years, indicating that process-induced variations in atomic diffusivity κ(x) and critical stress can shift the predicted failure time by several months. This significant spread underscores that deterministic single-point EM analysis can substantially over- or under-estimate the actual failure time for designs where a small number of high-current trees dominate the failure mechanism. 

ARM Cortex-A Logic Core. Fig. 12 shows the corre-sponding TTF histogram for the ARM Cortex-A logic core. All 100 runs result in IR-drop failure (zero censored). The mean TTF is 0.3204 years ( ≈ 1.01 × 10 7 s) with an extremely small standard deviation of 0.0001 years, corresponding to a coefficient of variation of only 0.03%. Virtually all samples 11 

(a) Joule-heating temperature distribution (Case 1): per-node temperatures 351–355 K, with hotspots concentrated in the lower-left region and along high-current interconnect paths 

(b) Qualcomm measured temperature distribu-tion (Case 2): broad central oval hotspot peaking at ≈355 K, peripheral nodes near 351 K, same 353 K average as Case 1 

(c) 2D Stress map and nucleation sites (Case 1): 203 mortal trees at 5 × 10 7 s

(d) Stress map and nucleation sites (Case 2): 203 mortal trees at 5 × 10 7 s

(e) 2D IR drop map during late-stage degradation (Case 1) 

(f) 2D IR drop map during late-stage degradation (Case 2) 

Fig. 10: Temperature maps, stress distributions, and IR drop maps for the ARM Cortex-A logic core under two thermal scenarios 

TABLE III: Performance comparison of EMSpice 3 across benchmark designs. A TTF entry of > 5.0 × 10 7 s indicates that the 10% IR-drop failure threshold was not reached within the simulated time window. The Krylov metric error is measured on TTF when failure occurs, and on the final IR drop otherwise.                                                                                   

> Design Name No. Trees Max Branch. per Tree Max Nodes per Tree Init. IR Drop (%) Final IR Drop (%) TTF (s) Mortal Wires Baseline CPU (s) Krylov CPU (s) Speed-up Krylov Metric Error (%) AES new 97 69 3450 6.14 6.86 >5.0×10 7688 4.56 3.76 1.21 0.0 armcore pad 68 34 1700 0.29 0.29 >5.0×10 702.35 1.99 1.18 0.0 JPEG new 178 126 6300 6.56 6.77 >5.0×10 71821 16.31 12.90 1.26 0.0 armcore logic 208 218 10900 7.19 56.00 1.23 ×10 710166 40.60 31.48 1.29 0.0 dual ram 55 29 1450 0.09 0.10 >5.0×10 7179 2.32 1.55 1.50 0.0 risc core 186 115 5750 6.19 29.64 1.29 ×10 719 5.40 4.45 1.21 0.0

collapse onto a single narrow bin near 0.3204 years. This near- deterministic behavior is consistent with the observations in 12 

Fig. 11: Monte Carlo TTF distribution for the RISC-V core (100 runs; 20% variation in κ(x) and critical stress). Mean TTF = 0.4496 years, σ = 0.1132 years; 2 runs are right-censored. 

Section V: the ARMcore design has 203 mortal trees (out of 208) whose M1-layer current densities far exceed the nu-cleation threshold. When the overwhelming majority of trees are deeply mortal, random perturbations in atomic diffusivity 

κ(x) and critical stress have negligible effect on which trees fail or when, because the design is already operating far into the failure regime. The TTF is therefore dominated by the deterministic stress buildup rate rather than by stochastic parameter variations. 

Fig. 12: Monte Carlo TTF distribution for the ARM Cortex-A logic core (100 runs; 20% variation in κ(x) and critical stress). Mean TTF = 0.3204 years, σ = 0.0001 years; 0 censored runs. 

Comparison and Discussion. The contrasting results reveal design-dependent variation sensitivity. The RISC-V core, with only 19 mortal trees, exhibits 25% TTF CoV because failure hinges on marginally mortal trees that small perturbations in κ(x) and critical stress can push across the nucleation threshold. The ARMcore, where nearly all 203 trees are deeply mortal, shows virtually no TTF sensitivity to the same perturbations—the TTF is dominated by deterministic stress buildup. This dichotomy provides a practical guideline: designs with few marginally mortal trees require statistical analysis, whereas deeply mortal designs may rely on deter-ministic sign-off. Together, these results confirm that both the spatial temperature structure and the margin of individual trees relative to the nucleation threshold must be characterized for accurate full-chip EM reliability assessment. VI. C ONCLUSIONS 

We presented EMSpice 3 , a full-chip temperature-aware multiphysics framework for coupled EM, TM, and IR-drop analysis in a single flow. The results show that spatial thermal structure has a first-order impact on reliability: equal-average thermal profiles produce more than 70% TTF spread for the RISC-V core and nearly 50% for the ARM Cortex-A logic core, confirming that average or peak temperature alone is insufficient for reliable sign-off. Process-variation sensitivity is strongly design-dependent: the RISC-V core exhibits about 25% TTF coefficient of variation under 20% variation in atomic diffusivity κ(x) and critical stress, while the ARM Cortex-A logic core is nearly deterministic at 0.03%. Together with the consistent 1.18 ×–1.50 × Krylov speedup, these results demonstrate that EMSpice 3 enables practical, map-aware, workload-aware EM sign-off. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback. Generative AI tools, specifically ChatGPT and Claude Code, were used to assist with editing and proofreading of this manuscript. REFERENCES [1] J. R. Black, “Electromigration-A Brief Survey and Some Recent Re-sults,” IEEE Trans. on Electron Devices , vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 338–347, Apr. 1969. [2] I. A. Blech, “Electromigration in thin aluminum films on titanium nitride,” Journal of Applied Physics , vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 1203–1208, 1976. [3] M. A. Korhonen, P. Borgesen, K. N. Tu, and C. Y. Li, “Stress evolution due to electromigration in confined metal lines,” Journal of Applied Physics , vol. 73, no. 8, pp. 3790–3799, 1993. [4] C. Cook, Z. Sun, E. Demircan, M. D. Shroff, and S. X.-D. Tan, “Fast electromigration stress evolution analysis for interconnect trees using krylov subspace method,” IEEE Trans. on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems , vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 969–980, May 2018. [5] H. Chen, S. X.-D. Tan, X. Huang, T. Kim, and V. Sukharev, “An-alytical modeling and characterization of electromigration effects for multibranch interconnect trees,” IEEE Trans. on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 1811–1824, 2016. [6] A. Abbasinasab and M. Marek-Sadowska, “RAIN: A tool for reliability assessment of interconnect networks—physics to software,” in Proc. Design Automation Conf. (DAC) . New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2018, pp. 133:1–133:6. [7] L. Chen, S. X.-D. Tan, Z. Sun, S. Peng, M. Tang, and J. Mao, “A fast semi-analytic approach for combined electromigration and ther-momigration analysis for general multisegment interconnects,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 350–363, 2021. [8] A. Todri, S. Kundu, P. Girard, A. Bosio, L. Dilillo, and A. Virazel, “A study of tapered 3-d TSVs for power and thermal integrity,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 306–319, Feb 2013. [9] M. Kavousi, L. Chen, and S. X.-D. Tan, “Fast electromigration stress analysis considering spatial joule heating effects,” in 2022 27th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC) , 2022, pp. 208–213. [10] Z. Sun, S. Yu, H. Zhou, Y. Liu, and S. X.-D. Tan, “EMSpice: Physics-Based Electromigration Check Using Coupled Electronic and Stress Simulation,” IEEE Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability ,vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 376–389, Jun. 2020. [11] S. Lamichhane, M. Kavousi, and S. X.-D. Tan, “EMspice 2.0: Multi-physics electromigration analysis tool for beyond moore ics,” in 2024 IEEE Computer Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI) , 2024. [12] O. Axelou, E. Tselepi, G. Floros, N. Evmorfopoulos, and G. Stamoulis, “Proton – a python framework for physics-based electromigration as-sessment on contemporary vlsi power grids,” in 2023 19th International Conference on Synthesis, Modeling, Analysis and Simulation Methods and Applications to Circuit Design (SMACD) , 2023, pp. 1–4. [13] L. Chen, S. X.-D. Tan, Z. Sun, S. Peng, M. Tang, and J. Mao, “A fast semi-analytic approach for combined electromigration and ther-momigration analysis for general multi-segment interconnects,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , pp. 1–1, 2020. [14] H. S. Carslaw and J. C. Jaeger, Conduction of Heat in Solids , 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959. [15] M. Kavousi, L. Chen, and S. X.-D. Tan, “Electromigration Immortality Check considering Joule Heating Effect for Multisegment Wires,” in 

Proc. Int. Conf. on Computer Aided Design (ICCAD) , 2020, pp. 1–8. [16] S. X.-D. Tan, H. Amrouch, T. Kim, Z. Sun, C. Cook, and J. Henkel, “Recent advances in EM and BTI induced reliability modeling, analysis and optimization,” Integration, the VLSI Journal , vol. 60, pp. 132–152, Jan. 2018. [17] S. X.-D. Tan, M. Tahoori, T. Kim, S. Wang, Z. Sun, and S. Kiamehr, 

VLSI Systems Long-Term Reliability – Modeling, Simulation and Opti-mization . Springer Publishing, 2019. [18] R. de Orio, H. Ceric, and S. Selberherr, “Physically based models of electromigration: From black’s equation to modern tcad models,” 

Microelectronics Reliability , vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 775–789, 2010, 2009 Reliability of Compound Semiconductors (ROCS) Workshop). [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0026271410000193 13 

[19] M. Korhonen, P. Bo/rgesen, K. Tu, and C.-Y. Li, “Stress evolution due to electromigration in confined metal lines,” Journal of Applied Physics ,vol. 73, no. 8, pp. 3790–3799, 1993. [20] V. Sukharev, A. Kteyan, and X. Huang, “Postvoiding stress evolution in confined metal lines,” IEEE Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 50–60, 2016. [21] S. M. Alam, C. L. Gan, C. V. Thompson, and D. E. Troxel, “Reliability computer-aided design tool for full-chip electromigration analysis and comparison with different interconnect metallizations,” Microelectron. J. , vol. 38, no. 4-5, pp. 463–473, Apr. 2007. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mejo.2006.11.017 [22] S. Torosyan, A. Kteyan, V. Sukharev, J.-H. Choy, and F. N. Najm, “Novel physics-based tool-prototype for electromigration assessment in commercial-grade power delivery networks,” Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B , vol. 39, no. 1, p. 013203, 12 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1116/6.0000617 [23] H. Lu and S. X.-D. Tan, “Accelerating physics-based electromigration analysis via rational krylov subspaces,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.00330 , Feb 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.00330 [24] S. Chatterjee, V. Sukharev, and F. N. Najm, “Fast Physics-Based Electromigration Checking for On-Die Power Grids,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Computer-Aided Design , ser. ICCAD ’16. New York, NY: ACM Press, Nov. 2016, pp. 1–8. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2966986.2967041 [25] “Commerical Multi/Many Cores Thermal Map Dataset,” https://github. com/sheldonucr/commercial \ thermal \ map \ dataset. [26] Synopsys, “Synopsys 32/28nm generic library for teaching ic design,” Accessed: Feb. 2019, [Online]. Available. [Online]. Available: http://www.synopsys.com