Title: A Comprehensive Design Framework for Vertical Power Delivery in High-Performance Computing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.28837v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 00:36:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> 1

# A Comprehensive Design Framework for Vertical Power Delivery in High-Performance Computing 

Sriharini Krishnakumar , Yaroslav Popryho , Mingeun Choi , Ramin Rahimzadeh Khorasani ,Madhavan Swaminathan , Satish Kumar and Inna Partin-Vaisband 

Abstract —Power delivery—including high-to-low voltage con-version, complex power distribution across heterogeneously in-tegrated chiplets, and efficient interconnect allocation—remains a critical bottleneck in high-performance computing (HPC) systems. Existing vertical power delivery (VPD) solutions are estimated to achieve less than 70% system-wide end-to-end power delivery efficiency, defined from platform input power to delivered on-chip load power, with substantial energy lost as heat before reaching on-chip point-of-loads (POLs). In the absence of systematic design methodologies, evaluating power quality, exploring architectural alternatives, and optimizing performance rely on computationally prohibitive simulations, resulting in suboptimal designs. This paper introduces an end-to-end scal-able power delivery framework for HPC systems, including distributed VPD (DVPD) architecture, DVPD design optimization methodology, and analytical models. The framework leverages substrate-embedded GaN power switches together with arrays of unit inductors and capacitors tailored for HPC applications. Multi-stage power conversion schemes (48V-to-1V, 48V-to-24V-to-1V, and 48V-to-12V-to-1V) are explored, with system-wide voltage drops and power losses evaluated under steady-state conditions. Design specifications for passive and active devices are formulated to meet next-generation efficiency targets. For the 48V-to-1V case, the proposed DVPD approach achieves 84% system-wide efficiency while occupying 54% of the area beneath the load system, with efficiency increasing to 87.6% at 75% area utilization across a 1–50,kW load range. Furthermore, steady-state voltage drops peak at 2.7% and transient drops at 9% (without decoupling capacitors), demonstrating the viability of DVPD for future wafer-scale HPC platforms. 

Index Terms —distributed vertical power delivery, 48V/1V, 12V/1V, heterogeneous integration roadmap (HIR), high current density, 3D, 2.5D, high performance computing (HPC). 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Within the next decade, the power demand of high-performance computing (HPC) systems is projected to increase to 1–2 kW per chip and 20–50 kW per server, with current 

Manuscript received 09 May 2026; revised 31 May 2026; accepted 00 March 2025. Date of publication 00 April 2025; date of current version 00 April 2025. This work was supported by the Center for Heterogeneous Integration of Micro Electronic Systems (CHIMES), one of seven centers in the Joint University Microelectronics Program (JUMP) 2.0, led by the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) and sponsored by the Defense Advance Research Project Agency (DARPA). S. Krishnakumar, Y. Popryho, and I. Partin-Vaisband are with the Depart-ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607 USA (e-mail: skrish47@uic.edu; ypopry2@uic.edu; vais-band@uic.edu). Corresponding author: Inna Partin-Vaisband. 

M. Choi and S. Kumar are with the George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: mingeun.choi@gatech.edu; satish.kumar@me.gatech.edu). R. R. Khorasani and M. Swaminathan are with the School of Electrical En-gineering and Computer Science, Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA 16801 USA (e-mail: ramin.rahimzadeh@psu.edu; mvs7249@psu.edu). Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https: //doi.org/10.1109/TCPMT.2025.0000000. 

Fig. 1: Power delivery approaches, (a) traditional lateral power delivery (LPD), and (b) vertical power delivery, featuring embedded passives and in-package power transistors integrated below the functional load chip. densities reaching 2–4 A/mm 2, according to the Heterogeneous Integration Roadmap (HIR) [1]). However, the performance of representative power delivery solutions (e.g., 1 kW NVIDIA V100, 10 kW NVIDIA DGX-V100) remains limited, with system-wide efficiencies below 70% and current densities under 1 A/mm 2 [2], [3]. This end-to-end efficiency is defined as the ratio of delivered chip power (TDP) to total platform input power, encompassing VR conversion, package PDN conduction, and platform distribution losses. The efficiency accounting methodology used throughout this work is formally summarized in Section IV. Traditionally, low-current 48 V power is converted to high-current, 1 V power with efficient but large motherboard voltage regulators (MBVRs). The converted high-current power is delivered via package power delivery network (PDN) to on-chip points-of-load (POLs) (see Fig. 1a). In modern scaled-down and scaled-out, heterogeneously integrated systems, such package PDNs can dissipate up to ∼40% of the total load power as heat [4], [5]. Furthermore, current density of existing passive and ac-tive power devices (e.g., inductors, capacitors, semicon-ductor switches) and the limited interconnect density con-strain achievable power density in current architectures (e.g.,0.8 A/mm 2 for the NVIDIA H100 [6]). Consequently, novel power delivery architectures and power management techniques are required to address the escalating power de-mands of emerging HPC systems. Vertical power delivery (VPD) (see Fig. 1b), incorporating 

> arXiv:2606.28837v1 [eess.SY] 27 Jun 2026 2

compact high-ratio (48V/1V or 12V/1V) integrated voltage regulators (VRs), have emerged as a promising solution to mit-igate traditional PPDN routing losses by reducing the effective VR-to-POL distance [7]–[11]. In this approach, low current is distributed laterally at high voltage prior to conversion, and converted with high-ratio VRs near POLs. As a result, the converted high current is only delivered vertically over a short distance to the on-chip loads. Compared to the MBVR-based 48 V/1 V conversion, this approach can reduce routing losses by nearly 48 2×. For example, less than 5% routing loss has been reported for a 1 kW VPD system in [12]. In addition, vertical stacking of passive and active power components in VPD architectures enable higher system-wide power density. Despite these advantages, conventional lumped VPD archi-tectures face fundamental limitations. Mechanically, embed-ding a single, large, stiff converter within a substrate pro-duces significant stiffness gradients and coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) mismatch with respect to the surrounding substrate, inducing global package warpage, delamination risk, and shear stress in the redistribution layer (RDL). From a reliability standpoint, strong electrical coupling between the converter power stage, the PDN, and the load system permits faults within the VR to propagate through the shared PDN within sub-microsecond timescales, risking system-level failure and making fault containment a primary reliability con-cern. Furthermore, a monolithic VR limits diagnostic resolu-tion and prevents localized fault isolation within the PDN. Pre-assembly characterization and post-assembly fault isolation are also limited, as individual converter stages cannot be indepen-dently accessed once integrated within a monolithic embedded power-delivery structure. Electrically, although lumped VPD architectures reduce routing loss, substantial voltage drop persists within the horizontal interconnects of the RDLs, as current must travel long distances—up to a quarter of the system perimeter—between the VR output and distant POLs on the same or adjacent chiplets. Finally, a centralized VR can-not manage spatio-temporal variations in HPC system power demand, as load steps through the shared PDN generate large current transients, increasing voltage deviation and electrical stress on the converter and global decoupling network. To address these limitations, a distributed vertical power delivery (DVPD) is proposed. The architecture employs a fine-pitch network of horizontally distributed VRs, with VR components vertically stacked across multiple power layers (PL), placing the VR outputs’ just tens of microns from the on-chip POLs. Partitioning power conversion into multiple smaller VRs reduces peak stress concentration and prevents the formation of a single mechanically stiff region within the substrate. Each VR produces localized deformation rather than global package deflection. With symmetric VR place-ment localized mechanical effects can partially offset one another, reducing overall warpage sensitivity. The distributed architecture also provides inherent redundancy. Real-time fault detection and isolation enable selective deactivation of a faulty VR while the remaining regulators redistribute load current. System operation therefore continues under partial failure conditions, improving fault tolerance and mitigating risk of system-level failure [13]. Moreover, the modular and identical VR-cell structure of DVPD enables cell-level characterization prior to assembly, and the selective VR activation capability that supports fault tolerance equally provides a mechanism for in-system functional testing. A complete embedded-array test insertion methodology remains an important direction for future work of [13]. From an efficiency standpoint, in a DVPD system with 

M VRs, the per-VR output current is reduced to Io/M ,compared to Io in a single-VR approach. As M increases, the VR components move closer laterally, shortening the intra-VR routing paths and reducing conduction losses in the RDL network (with constant trace width, see Section III-D). Hence, the distributed architecture effectively lowers internal routing losses within VR, while vertical stacking (applicable to both DVPD and VPD) primarily enhances system-wide power density. Although VPD can increase density, its single-inductor high-current requirement typically forces low-density air-core inductors, whereas DVPD lowers per-inductor current and enables dense magnetic-core integration. Moreover, DVPD architectures inherently support dynamic, fine-grained power management—an increasingly critical ca-pability for heterogeneous, chiplet-based next-generation HPC systems [14]. It is important to distinguish the proposed DVPD approach from conventional board-level distributed VRM placement. Existing systems may employ multiple VRMs on the board or package periphery; however, these converters are typically few in number, relatively coarse-grained, and still deliver high current laterally through the package PDN before reaching the on-chip POLs. In contrast, DVPD considers a much more highly distributed in-package design regime, where tens to hundreds of vertically integrated VR cells are embedded beneath the load system and co-optimized with the package PDN. At this scale, power delivery becomes a coupled design problem involving converter topology, switching frequency, passive-component scaling, floorplanning, vertical intercon-nect allocation, routing loss, ripple constraints, and package-level area limits. Therefore, practical DVPD requires not only an architectural concept, but also a systematic design methodology and automated framework for rapid performance evaluation, design-space exploration, and optimization. Existing methodologies rely on computationally expensive simulations, rendering system-level evaluation and optimiza-tion impractical for large-scale power architectures such as the proposed DVPD. The proposed framework provides a scalable DVPD design methodology spanning from individual high-performance chips operating at a few kilowatts to wafer-scale systems operating at tens of kilowatts. Rather than assuming a fixed number of converters or a manually selected layout, the framework determines the degree of VR distribution, com-ponent sizing, placement, and vertical stacking required for a given power specification and set of technology constraints, providing quantitative estimates of power-loss distribution, DC voltage drops, and transient voltage droops across large-scale DVPD systems. The primary contributions and new findings of this work are as follows:  

> •

DVPD architecture: A DVPD architecture is introduced in which power conversion is spatially partitioned across VR 3

Fig. 2: Architecture A1, A2, A3 employ DVPD architecture with power transistors and passives embedded in-substrate below the die for 48 V/1 V, 24 V/1 V, and 12 V/1 V, respectively. In addition, for A2 and A3, a first-stage conversion (48 V/24 V and 48 V/12 V) is performed on PCB using high-efficiency ( ∼98%) transformer-based converters. tiles with vertically integrated passive and active compo-nents. By restructuring current distribution in both lateral and vertical dimensions, DVPD mitigates copper-density concentration, stiffness gradients, and CTE mismatch, en-abling dynamic power management and fault-tolerant scal-able multi-kilowatt power delivery.  

> •

Loss-optimized VR partitioning framework: A quanti-tative VR sizing methodology is developed that balances conduction and switching losses under parasitic constraints. Applicable to both VPD and DVPD, the formulation reveals sublinear scaling of dominant losses with regulator parti-tioning under optimal switch sizing, providing a principled basis for converter-level scaling.  

> •

Unified DVPD design methodology and system-wide co-optimization: A system-level framework jointly optimizes VR count, sizing, placement, vertical stacking, and inter-connect allocation under packaging constraints, explicitly coupling converter design, floorplanning, and PDN behavior for physically consistent design-space exploration.  

> •

Scalable architectural evaluation: The framework enables systematic comparison of optimized VPD and DVPD con-figurations across integration levels (48V/1V, 48V/24V/1V, 48V/12V/1V), demonstrating scalable operation from 1 kW to tens of kW and achieving up to 84% system-wide efficiency within the modeled design space. The proposed framework enables rapid construction and evaluation of practical power delivery solutions for scaled-out systems while rigorously capturing the effects of device-and package-level technologies as well as alternative power conversion circuit implementations. It has also been extended to thermal-VPD co-design studies [15], [16] and in ongo-ing investigations of HPC cost and performance tradeoffs. To ensure realistic behavior, the framework is built upon validated device, converter, and interconnect models cross-verified against manufacturer tools, prior implementations, SPICE/Spectre simulations, and extracted parasitics, with tech-nology parameters derived from datasheets, foundry design rules, and prior experimental studies. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion II describes the DVPD architecture featuring vertically stacked in-substrate and backside VR components. In Sec-tion III, a performance-driven design optimization method-ology for HPC DVPD is introduced. Analytical models for determining the minimum switching frequency, optimal sizing of power switches, and vertical interconnect allocation are also presented in this section. In Section IV, the framework is exploited to design, characterize, and compare different power delivery architectures. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section V. II. D ISTRIBUTED VERTICAL POWER DELIVERY (DVPD) The proposed DVPD architecture, supporting both single-stage (48V/1V) and dual-stage (48V/24V/1V or 48V/12V/1V) power conversion schemes, is illustrated in Fig. 2. The ar-chitecture comprises M laterally distributed VRs, with the corresponding power devices vertically aligned and embedded within stacked substrate layers. In the single-stage configura-tion, the 48 V low-current supply is delivered to the individual VRs at the bottom substrate layer and flows vertically through the stack while being converted to 1 V high-current POL power. In the dual-stage configuration, the first conversion stage (48V/24V or 48V/12V) is implemented on the sys-4

Fig. 3: Proposed design optimization framework for DVPD systems. Design components are described in Section III. tem integration platform (e.g., PCB, wafer, panel), and the intermediate 24 V or 12 V power is subsequently converted and delivered to POL by the distributed VRs with vertically stacked components. Multi-phase hybrid converters (switched-capacitor (SC) buck) are widely recognized for their high efficiency in high-ratio voltage conversion, as well as for alleviated voltage stress on power switches and effective mitigation of the ultra-low duty cycle inherent to buck converter [17]–[22]. Furthermore, multi-phase VR topologies, consisting of several parallel-connected, phase-shifted branches, are commonly employed to reduce output current ripple [23]. In this work, a phase refers to a switching branch (comprising an inductor and its corresponding power switches) that operates with a phase shift relative to other branches, delivering a portion of the total converter current. Accordingly, per-phase metrics refer to the performance of one such branch. In the proposed DVPD architecture, these converters are particularly advantageous, as their multi-phase operation en-ables efficient current sharing among distributed VRs, while their hybrid topology supports high voltage conversion ratios, power density and compatibility with vertically stacked inte-gration. The proposed framework is not limited to a specific hybrid converter implementation; rather, it provides a general design methodology for co-optimizing converter components (high- and low-side power switches, SC flying capacitors, and buck inductors) within vertical stacks of DVPD power layers. Furthermore, the proposed framework is equally applicable to other switching-based topologies that exploit high-side and low-side switches, ranging from traditional buck converters to emerging resonant VRs [24]. Hybrid VR components are integrated within multiple ver-tically stacked substrates (e.g., three in Fig. 2), aligned with the natural power flow of the hybrid topology. Furthermore, when fabricated as individual chiplets, VR components can be vertically stacked on the backside of a substrate and inter-connected through TSVs. An example of the multi-substrate 

Fig. 4: Interaction between the proposed DVPD electrical de-sign framework and the self-consistent electrothermal frame-work of [25], [26]. approach in Fig. 2 employs high-side GaN switches that are flip-chipped to the RDL of the bottom substrate, while low-side switches (bottom layer), flying capacitors (middle layer), and inductors (top layer near the POLs) are embedded within the subsequent substrate power layers. To guarantee scalability of the architecture to high-power scale-out systems, the power delivery system must fit within the footprint of the load. Accordingly, the number of power layers is ultimately determined by the number and size of components in the chosen VR topology and constrained by the capabilities of advanced packaging technologies. This establishes a direct link between VR topology selection and practical packaging limits, highlighting a critical design tradeoff for scalable DVPD systems. 5

In the VRs of interest, more than 70% of conversion losses originate from power switches, making them the primary source of heat dissipation, with temperatures exceeding 100°C [15], [16]. This necessitates advanced thermal management techniques, such as substrate-embedded micro-channel cool-ing to effectively dissipate heat and maintain power system performance. In the proposed framework, thermal awareness is incorporated using the thermal-fluidic solver of [25], [26] enabling evaluation of cooling requirements and temperature feasibility during architectural DVPD optimization. Specifi-cally, the component-level power-loss distributions and opti-mized DVPD geometry generated by the proposed methodol-ogy are supplied to the thermal framework, which iteratively updates temperature-dependent losses and cooling conditions until thermal convergence is achieved as shown in Fig. 4. Consequently, density-efficiency tradeoffs are evaluated under thermal feasibility constraints. Embedding chiplets into substrates with advanced packag-ing has recently gained attention in applications such as mm-wave telecommunication [27] and power delivery [28], [29], owing to reduced interconnection losses enabled by shorter via lengths. Recent studies have explored various substrate materials and fabrication processes, with glass emerging as a promising candidate for embedding single or multiple chiplets [30]. However, while chip embedding within a single substrate layer has been demonstrated, the fabrication of vertically stacked substrate layers that integrate both active and passive components remains an open challenge. Based on the findings of this work, advances in multi-substrate vertical stacking and chiplet embedding are identified as critical enablers for meeting the power performance goals defined in the HIR [1]. III. C O-O PTIMIZATION OF VR S AND PPDN FOR DVPD The design of complex DVPD systems requires careful co-optimization of the multi-layer PPDN and distributed stacks of VRs, while accounting for the physical, electrical, and thermal properties of the VRs in conjunction with advanced packaging and device constraints. All DVPD components, including horizontal RDLs, vertical interconnects, passive devices, and power switches, must be jointly co-optimized to maximize overall system efficiency. A unified design framework for DVPD systems is pre-sented in Fig. 3, in which switching frequency selection, power-switch and inductor sizing, interconnect allocation, and system floorplanning are co-optimized within a single flow. By combining component libraries with analytical DVPD-aware loss and voltage models, the framework determines the number, size, placement, and vertical stacking of VRs while evaluating system-wide efficiency, IR drop, and transient droop. The resulting design-space exploration reveals key de-pendencies among converter topology, packaging constraints, and interconnect allocation, providing quantitative insight into achievable efficiency and power density. Building on prior studies [3], [31], the double series ca-pacitor hybrid (DSCH) converter is adopted in this work as a promising architecture for high-voltage ratio conversion (from 48 V, 24 V, or 12 V to 1 V), and, more importantly, as a 

Fig. 5: Minimum switching frequency, f min sw , of DSCH VRs in a DVPD system delivering 1kW@1V load power to the functional system at a current density of 2 A/mm 2.demonstration vehicle to expose key concepts, dependencies, and design tradeoffs in DVPD. By applying the proposed framework to DSCH, findings related to operating frequency and VR sizing are derived, which generalize to other converter topologies. Specifically, the section is organized into five subsections: (a) VR switching frequency, (b) modular inductor scaling, (c) power switch sizing, (d) floorplanning, and (e) interconnect considerations. 

A. VR Switching Frequency 

The switching frequency of hybrid regulators plays a critical role in system performance. Higher switching frequencies reduce the required inductance and passive-component area but simultaneously increase switching-related losses and ther-mal density. Since the proposed framework minimizes total power loss subject to footprint, power-density, and ripple con-straints, the optimal operating point for the evaluated DVPD configurations naturally occurs near the minimum feasible switching frequency satisfying the specified ripple constraint. To address this tradeoff in a systematic manner, a generalizable methodology is developed for selecting a preferred VR switch-ing frequency. This methodology provides design guidelines that are applicable across hybrid converter topologies and packaging configurations, ensuring that ripple is maintained within acceptable limits while minimizing switching losses [32]. The approach is demonstrated based on a DSCH VR in Section IV. Power inductors in multi-phase hybrid topologies, operating in continuous conduction mode, carry a DC-biased triangular ripple current. Each phase, consisting of an inductor and its switches, delivers a portion of the load current. The per-phase ripple amplitude ( ∆iφ = γI φ) decreases with larger inductance ( Lφ) and higher switching frequency ( fsw ), and is constrained to maintain efficiency and device reliability. The minimum switching frequency therefore scales as, 

f min  

> sw

∝ ∆VL

γI φLφ

, (1) where ∆VL is the effective voltage swing across the inductor (e.g., 48 V →1 V or 12 V →1 V conversion). 6

Both ∆VL and Lφ are constrained in DVPD: the large step-down conversion produces a high inductor voltage swing, while embedded inductors necessarily provide smaller in-ductance. This creates a fundamental tradeoff: distributing current across more regulators lowers the per-VR current (and potentially the conduction losses), but also proportionally low-ers the permissible current ripple which increases switching losses by pushing f min  

> sw

higher. Multi-phase operation is essential to alleviate this tradeoff, since interleaving phases relaxes the ripple constraint and reduces the minimum switching frequency, enabling higher efficiency and scalability in DVPD. 

B. Modular Inductor Scaling 

Inductors and power switches are the largest VR compo-nents, and one of them generally dictates the footprint within which all other devices must be accommodated on adjacent vertically stacked layers. In addition, the size of these devices directly impacts conduction and switching losses as well as thermal density of the stacked VR. A primary limitation of compact magnetic-core inductors is the saturation current. To sustain the target load cur-rent within the footprint constraints, a modular inductor ap-proach is adopted, trading excess inductance for increased saturation capability. In this approach, multiple unit induc-tors are connected in parallel and arranged both laterally and vertically in a fine-pitch 3D array (see Fig. 2). Each unit inductor exhibits an inductance L0 and a saturation current I0 . When the required per-phase inductor current (Iϕ) exceeds IL0, several unit inductors are paralleled, with the required number given by NL = ⌈Iϕ/I L0⌉. This con-figuration reduces the effective inductance to Lϕ = L0/N L,thereby increasing the minimum switching frequency as de-fined in (1). Area utilization is maximized when Iϕ/I L0

is close to an integer, minimizing redundant units and maximizing current density within the footprint. Accord-ingly, unit inductors should be designed for scalable parallel integration by carefully bal-ancing saturation current and inductance values. In addition, by adjusting the number of parallel-connected inductors, the effective inductance and current capacity can be tuned to match operating conditions (e.g., higher current with lower effective inductance, or lower current with higher inductance to meet ripple constraints). While power management is not explicitly modeled in this paper, it remains a primary concern and is expected to benefit from the modular inductor approach. For such scalable design, the minimum switching frequency in (1) is expressed as 

f min  

> sw

∝ ∆VL

γI φLφ

= ∆VL

γI L0L0

, (2) where γ is the allowable ripple ratio. The relationship between minimum VR switching fre-quency, the number of distributed VRs, and the input voltage is illustrated in Fig. 5. Over a broad range of VR counts (up to 

∼70 units in this example), the minimum frequency remains flat because allowable ripple ratio, γ, is achieved through the 

Fig. 6: Sizing factor, wopt 

> sw

, in a DVPD system delivering 1 kW load power. The figure illustrates the general trend that the sizing factor decreases with input voltage, with the crossover point indicating the voltage at which footprint constraints begin to limit switch sizing. required number of unit inductors, NL, independently of the per-VR current (see (2)). Once the per-VR current drops below the saturation rating of a single unit inductor and NL cannot be further reduced, the allowable ripple ratio must be achieved by driving the minimum switching frequency upward. Note that beyond this threshold, the inductor overhead increases Input voltage further shifts this behavior: larger con-version ratios (e.g., 48 V →1 V) impose a higher mini-mum frequency than smaller ratios (e.g., 12 V →1 V). To-gether, these results indicate the existence of a preferred VR count that minimizes both per-phase inductor usage and switching frequency. While the exact crossover de-pends on system targets (here shown for a 1 kW DVPD system at 2 A/mm 2), the general insight is that the pro-posed framework identifies the regime where distributed VRs achieve the lowest feasible switching frequency without excessive inductor overhead .

C. Power Switch Sizing 

In high-ratio embedded VRs, the dominant portion of power loss occurs in the power switches. Therefore, optimizing the power switches to minimize conduction and switching losses is essential for improving overall converter efficiency. In the general case, the optimum width values of the individual VR power switches can be obtained by constructing the total power-loss expression [33]: larger currents favor wider devices (with lower ON resistance ∝ 1/w ), while higher switching frequencies penalize wide devices due to increased capacitive losses ( ∝ w · fsw ). Solving for ∂P/∂w = 0 the scaling of the optimal switch width as, 

wopt  

> FET

∝ Ids 

Vds 

· 1

√fsw 

, (3) where Ids and Vds are, respectively, the RMS current and off-state voltage across the power switch. For a given load current per VR, the optimal switch width follows (3). With 

M distributed VRs, the current handled by each VR scales as 

Ids ∝ 1/M , yielding wopt FET ∝ 1/M . Consequently, the per-VR conduction and switching losses decrease approximately 7

Fig. 7: Intra-VR routing geometry scaling with increasing number of distributed voltage regulators (VRs). While the per-VR footprint decreases with increasing M , the effective rout-ing width remains largely unchanged, whereas routing length decreases approximately with wopt LS ∝ 1/M . Consequently, interconnect resistance and associated intra-VR routing losses are reduced, providing a key benefit of the proposed DVPD architecture. as 1/M . Since M VRs operate in parallel, the reduction in per-VR loss is offset by the number of VRs, such that the total power-switch loss remains approximately constant for a fixed system-level load power. The low-side switches conduct output current for a larger fraction of the switching cycle and therefore carry higher RMS current, resulting in larger device width than the high-side switches. Consequently, the overall VR footprint is primarily determined by the low-side switches and the embedded induc-tors. The intent of (3) is to capture the topology-independent scaling relationship of the optimal switch width with current, voltage stress, and switching frequency that drive the proposed design methodology. The exact switch widths are obtained as part of the optimization framework by constructing the total switch-loss expression for the selected device technology and converter topology and solving ∂P/∂w = 0 . Representative VR power-loss formulations are provided in [33], while anal-ogous models are commonly used for GaN HEMTs and other power-device technologies. 

D. Floorplanning 

Given M VRs distributed across vertically stacked layers and a fixed per-layer area budget (e.g., 250 mm 2 if supplying 1 kA at 4 A/mm 2), the VR components on each layer (e.g., switches on a switch layer, or inductors on an inductor layer, as shown in Fig. 2) are arranged in an m×n array. The number of rows m in this array is determined by the dimensions of the largest components, typically the inductor length ( lind ) or the switch length ( lsw ). Accordingly, the maximum allowable low-side switch width is given by 

wmax  

> LS

= area budget 

M · max {lind , l LS } . (4) where max {lind , l LS } is the effective row length for each VR. To reduce lateral conduction losses, all VR components are vertically aligned within a single cell footprint of the m × n

array, given by max {lind , l LS } · wmax  

> LS

.When the optimal switch width, wopt  

> LS

(see (3)), exceeds the maximum allowable width, wmax  

> LS

, the switch must be resized to fit within a single cell footprint. This enforces a tradeoff between power efficiency and footprint utilization, as undersized switches increase conduction loss but allow denser integration and greater DVPD scalability. Importantly, a geometric upper bound on switch sizing is established by (4), which directly translates into a limit on the achievable current density per layer. Similar to the modular unit-inductor concept, vertical stacking of smaller parallel-connected switches can be employed to extend scalability within multi-layer packaging constraints. Furthermore, smaller components (e.g., high-side switches, capacitors) can typically be embedded within the footprint of the largest switch on adjacent layers, improving per-layer area utilization and supporting DVPD co-design efficiency. The sizing factor, defined as wopt  

> LS

/wmax  

> LS

, is shown in Fig. 6 as a function of the input voltage, serving as an indicator of whether switches can be optimally sized for loss minimization or are constrained by footprint area. Importantly, the sizing factor is independent of the number of distributed VRs, M ,as long as the number of rows m in the floorplanned m × n

array remains unchanged. This invariance arises because M ,affects both wopt  

> LS

(through the reduced per-VR load current, 

Ids ∝ 1 

> M

), and wmax  

> LS

(directly proportional to 1 

> M

), in the same way, and the dependencies cancel out. Consequently, the sizing factor is governed solely by the input voltage. At lower voltages ( < 30 V in this example), the optimal switch width exceeds the maximum footprint-limited width (see (3)), forcing a reduction in effective width and incurring higher conduction loss in exchange for higher current density and scalability. At higher voltages ( > 30 V), the optimal width fits within the footprint, enabling switches to be sized for efficiency without sacrificing density. Thus, the crossover input voltage marks the boundary where footprint constraints begin to limit switch optimization . While 30 V is spe-

Fig. 8: Per-layer VIC footprint across three voltage conversion schemes in a 1 kW DVPD system. The bottleneck layer is configuration-dependent: for direct 48 →1 V conversion the coarse-pitch BGAs dominate, while staged 48 →12 →1 V oper-ation shifts the bottleneck to TSV-based layers due to increased intermediate current. 8

TABLE I: End-to-End Efficiency Boundary and Loss Account-ing                    

> Power Segment Baseline A1 A2 A3
> System-level boundary 48-V Board-Level Input →POL Conversion scheme 48V/12V/1V 48V/1V 48V/24V/1V 48V/12V/1V Platform-level VR 48V/12V XFMR 1,12V/1V buck N/A 48V/24V XFMR 1
> 48V/12V XFMR 1
> Platform-level PDN Included Included Included Included Embedded/ package VR N/A Hybrid 2Hybrid 2Hybrid 2
> Package-level PDN 3: BGAs, TSVs, RDLs, chiplet pads) Included Included Included Included
> 1A 98%-efficient transformer-based converter is assumed for illustration; other high-efficiency front-end converters can be used and are supported.
> 2Hybrid VRs are assumed for illustration; resonant converters are also promising; other VRs are also supported.
> 3See Table III.

cific to the 1 kW example in Fig. 6, the crossover point is design-dependent and can be determined using the proposed framework for any performance target and device technology. The proposed DVPD floorplanning further reduces power dissipated in PDN between the VR components. Specifically, the effective width (and thus, per-length resistance) of the in-ternal VR interconnect is roughly determined by the length of the largest VR component, max {lind , l sw } and is independent of M. Alternatively, the effective routing length between VR components is defined by wopt LS ∝ 1/M , as illustrated in Fig.7. 

Combined with the per-VR DVPD current reduction, the proposed approach achieves 

M (RP DN /M )( I/M )2 ∝ 1/M 2 reduction in the internal VR routing losses .Note that this intra-VR routing loss reduction is independent of the overall load-system footprint geometry and is governed by the local intra-VR routing geometry. The derivation as-sumes that (1) the distributed VR cells are locally similar as 

M increases, (2) the effective routing width is determined by 

max {lind , l sw } and remains approximately independent of M ,(3) each VR is designed to deliver approximately 1/M of the maximum load current, and (4) intra-VR routing is not constrained by local blockages, keep-out regions, or package design-rule limitations that would force routing detours or reduce available routing bandwidth. 

E. Interconnect 

Efficient DVPD requires co-optimization of vertical and lateral interconnects to satisfy current demands without ex-ceeding the available in-package area. Vertical interconnects (VICs), implemented through BGAs, TSVs, or fine-pitch pads depending on the integration level, must be sized to carry the required current while ensuring mechanical robustness and electrical reliability. Different nodes within a VR cell carry different currents; the number of parallel VICs per connection is sized based on the connection current and per-via current limit, with current assumed to be uniformly distributed across the allocated VICs. A critical observation is that the performance-limiting layer is not determined solely by the layer carrying the largest current. Advanced packaging technologies enable fine-pitch vertical interconnects (down to 

<10 μm pitch) supported by interfaces such as SuperChips [34] and BoW [35]), allowing dense high-current delivery in upper layers. By contrast, bottom layers such as BGA inter-faces rely on coarse-pitch solder balls, consuming significantly more area per via despite carrying lower current. Thus, the bottleneck layer is jointly determined by current magnitude, conversion ratio ( Vout /V in ), and interconnect technology. The scaling with input voltage can be approximated analyti-cally. Since RMS current directly governs electromigration and power loss in the interconnects and defines the current-carrying requirement and long-term reliability of each vertical link, it provides the appropriate basis for estimating VIC demand and footprint. For buck-derived (including hybrid) converters in continuous conduction mode, the input RMS current can be expressed as 

Iin,rms ∝ Iout 

q Vout  

> Vin

, (5) valid when the input current waveform is nearly a square pulse with duty cycle proportional to Vout /V in . For example, reducing the VR input voltage by a factor of four, from 48 V to 12 V (while maintaining a 1 V output), increases the RMS input current by a factor of two, even though the average input current rises by four. Since the required VIC count and footprint area scale with Iin,rms , the overall interconnect area likewise doubles. This square-root dependence provides a fast rule of thumb for DVPD planning: lowering the VR input voltage improves conversion efficiency but simultaneously increases interconnect demand, reducing the in-package real estate available for VR embedding. The per-layer VIC areas for representative conversion sce-narios are illustrated in Fig. 8 (additional details are provided in Section IV). The results show that the layer dictating system scalability shifts depending on the conversion ra-tio: in direct 48 V →1 V conversion, the TSV-based layers TABLE II: Performance of Embedded Inductors.                                                                                   

> Type Reference Core LL□Isat I□RESR
> μr(nH) (nH/mm 2)(A) (A/mm 2)(m Ω)PCB APEC’14 [36] 11.2 0.6 847Coax ECTC’21 [37] 8.5 2.5 6.3 820 12 Toroid ECTC’21 [38] 30 420 48 2.5 0.3 89 Spiral ECTC’25 [39] a15 107 15.2 70 9.9 11 Solenoid T-ED’24 [40] -340 56.7 2.2 0.4 308 Solenoid T-ED’21 [41] -6.5 14.4 1.6 3.6 22 TSV TPEL’26 [42] b600 20 54 0.5 1.35 36 Spiral TCPMT’25 [43] 180 330 36.7 3.5 0.39 85 Array TCPMT’21 [44] 65 170 33.6 1.9 0.37 15 Target --250 77 51.5 12
> aRe-simulated with TY-M5 material.
> bTen TSVs connected in series. 9

Fig. 9: Sensitivity of VR power loss to embedded inductor characteristics, showing VR loss as a function of inductor inductance density and DC resistance as extracted from the proposed DVPD framework. Representative recently demon-strated embedded inductors from Table I are overlaid for com-parison. The results highlight the tradeoffs among inductance density, resistance, and current density, and identify the target operating region required to achieve high-efficiency DVPD operation. dominate the footprint, whereas in staged 48 V →12 V →1 V operation, the higher intermediate VR input current drives coarse-pitch BGAs in bottom layer toward the area limit. This highlights a fundamental DVPD tradeoff: interconnect bottlenecks are configuration-dependent and must be evaluated through joint consideration of current scal-ing and packaging technology. Lateral redistribution layers (RDLs) complement vertical interconnects by routing power and ground both within and across VRs. Although the specific trace dimensions de-pend on process technology, the essential observation is that 

allocating separate RDL layers to intra-VR and inter-VR distribution enables balanced current allocation and preserves signal integrity. Taken together, the vertical interconnect capacity and the lateral routing density define the achievable current density and integration limits of the DVPD architecture. IV. DVPD D ESIGN SPACE EXPLORATION AND 

FRAMEWORK VALIDATION 

To evaluate the efficiency and density limits achievable with practical device and packaging technologies, the proposed framework is applied to a 1 kW, 2 A/mm 2 DVPD system employing DSCH regulators. A representative DVPD VR-cell implementation used in the following case studies is illustrated in Fig. 10. For consistency, all efficiency values reported in this section are evaluated using a unified end-to-end power delivery bound-ary extending from platform-level input power to delivered on-chip load power. Accordingly, all reported efficiencies include front-end conversion losses, VR conversion losses, package/interconnect distribution losses, and VR-to-POL rout-ing losses. The corresponding loss accounting for the evaluated architectures is summarized in Table I. Representative state-of-the-art inductors across different topologies are compared in Table II. While certain structures can achieve high current density, this is often accompanied by reduced inductance density, increased area, or higher re-sistance, reflecting a fundamental tradeoff among inductance density, current capability, and loss in embedded magnetic structures. Based on representative recently demonstrated embedded inductors (see Table II), a target unit inductor specification of 77 nH/mm² inductance density, 5 A peak current, and 11 m Ω DC resistance is adopted in this study to evaluate the achievable DVPD design space. Fig. 9 presents VR loss as a function of inductance density and effective series resistance together with representative embedded inductors. The results highlight the dependence of achievable DVPD efficiency on inductor characteristics and identify the passive-device requirements needed to achieve tar-get system-level efficiency and density goals. The framework is agnostic to inductor type and can evaluate performance for arbitrary inductor parameters. Flying capacitors with voltage stress levels of 8–32 V and a capacitance density of 1–2 μF/mm 2 are employed [28]. Each VR cell incorporates two 3.2 μF flying capacitors sized to satisify the 2% ripple constraint and embedded within the middle layer (PL 2 in Fig. 2) as part of the local VR-cell foot-print. VIC characteristics are selected based on representative fabrication constraints reported in [10], [28], including aspect ratio, pitch, and material properties, and are listed in Table III. These parameters define a feasible design point for evaluation; however, the proposed framework is not limited to these values and can incorporate alternative interconnect technologies and specifications. Representative interconnect dimensions and the corresponding vertical interconnect hierarchy are illustrated in Fig. 10. The fine-pitch 10 μm interfaces correspond to TABLE III: Vertical Interconnect Characteristics and Opti-mized VIC Allocation Across Integration Levels.                                                                            

> Platform a
> /PKG PL 1
> RDL/ RDL PL 2
> RDL/ RDL PL 3
> RDL/ RDL RDL/ Chiplet Technology parameters
> Type BGAs TSVs TSVs TSVs Pads Material solder bCu bCu bCu bCu b
> dc(μm) 400 30 30 30 10
> hc(μm) 300 300 300 300 10
> pc(μm) 800 60 60 60 20
> Ac(μm 2)125,663 707 707 707 100
> Rc(m Ω)0.3 7.1 7.1 7.1 1.7
> 48V/1V # VICs 132 30,202 27,845 14,148 200,000 Area (mm 2)85 110 100 50 20
> 48V/24V/1V # VICs 186 30,715 27,380 14,148 200,000 Area (mm 2)120 111 98 50 20
> 48V/12V/1V # VICs 266 31,115 26,399 14,148 200,000 Area (mm 2)170 112 95 50 20
> aPCB, wafer, panel or any other system integration platform.
> bSolder resistivity: 130 n Ω·m, Cu resistivity: 17 n Ω·m. 10

Fig. 10: Representative DVPD VR-cell implementation used in the case studies, illustrating stacked power-delivery layers, embedded active and passive components, vertical interconnect hierarchy, and representative dimensions for BGAs, TSVs, and chiplet-interface pads. chiplet-pad connections, whereas the substrate TSVs employ substantially larger dimensions consistent with current glass and silicon substrate technologies. GaN devices with Vgs = 5 V, μC AlGaN = 67 .4 A/V 2,

lsw = 1 mm, Ciss0 = 220 pF/mm 2, Coss0 = 150 pF/mm 2,and Ig = 2 .4 A are considered. The parameters are extracted from SPICE Ids –Vgs characteristics and EPC GaN device datasheets [45] and are used to construct the corresponding switch-loss models within the framework. Once the target performance, technology specifications, and VR topology are provided as inputs, the framework automatically performs the corresponding DVPD design-space exploration and optimiza-tion, generating detailed per-layer floorplans together with comprehensive electrical and physical performance report. These reports include spatial and component-level power-loss distributions, steady-state and transient voltage drops, and den-sity characteristics used to identify architectural bottlenecks and quantify overall system-level tradeoffs. Note that the results presented in this section are not intended to represent a single globally optimal DVPD sys-tem. Rather, they demonstrate the capability of the proposed framework to systematically evaluate DVPD design tradeoffs under a representative set of technology and architectural assumptions. 

A. Conversion Loss 

The total VR losses—combined switching and conduction losses of all stacked components (switches, inductors, capaci-tors) and their interconnections—are shown in Fig. 11. Increas-ing the number of VRs reduces the per-VR current linearly, while the lateral routing distance between VR components also decreases as the VR footprint shrinks (see Section III-D). Together, these effects reduce intra-VR routing losses, which scale quadratically, thereby improving the overall power con-version efficiency. While the demonstrated power-loss savings are lower than the predicted theoretical value ( M 2) due to additional loss components associated with inductors and power-switches that do not scale with M , significant power-loss reduction is still observed with DVPD. However, once the per-phase current falls below the saturation rating of a unit inductor, higher switching frequencies are required to satisfy ripple constraints (see Fig. 5), which increases switch-ing losses. This tradeoff establishes an optimal VR count— 70 in the DSCH-based case study—that maximizes system efficiency. Rather than being prescribed analytically, the preferred VR count is obtained by numerically minimizing the total modeled VR-system loss over feasible integer values of M . For each candidate M , the framework optimizes the design parame-ters described in Section III, including switching frequency, modular inductor allocation, switch sizing, floorplanning, and interconnect allocation, and evaluates the resulting combined switching, conduction, and routing losses [33], [46] with the optimized design parameters subject to footprint and ripple constraints. Thus, the optimal value of M = 70 in this case study is a design-point-specific output of the framework rather than a general result. To further assess sensitivity to power-switch technology, the framework is evaluated across switch channel lengths ( lsw )

Fig. 11: Total conversion loss and loss distribution in a DVPD system delivering 1 kW at 1 V to a 500 mm 2 load system. (a) Total conversion loss as a function of the number of distributed VRs. (b) Loss distribution for 10-VR (left) and 70-VR (right) configurations. 11 

TABLE IV: Sensitivity to Power-Switch Technology           

> Channel length Conversion loss Efficiency (mm) (%) (%)
> 0.5 10.87 87 1.0 13.88 84 1.8 18.68 80

TABLE V: Sensitivity to Interconnect Technology                                     

> Design Interconnect Bottleneck VIC area VIC loss Efficiency case assumption layer (mm 2)(W) (%)
> Nominal Baseline PL 1: RDL/RDL 110 3.71 84.46 TSV-R ↑RTSV = 1 .5×PL 1: RDL/RDL 110 4.12 84.28 TSV pitch ↑ρTSV = 1 .5×PL 1: RDL/RDL 245 3.71 84.64 BGA pitch ↑ρBGA = 1 .5×Platform/PKG 191 3.71 84.46

ranging from 0.5 mm to 1.8 mm for the DVPD system with 48 V input voltage, 70 distributed VRs, and a nominal switch channel length of lsw = 1.0 mm. Since lsw scales both device on-resistance and capacitance in the adopted switch model, this sweep captures the combined sensitivity of conduction and switching losses. Conversion loss increases from 10.87% at lsw = 0.5 mm to 13.88% at the nominal lsw = 1.0 mm and 18.68% at lsw = 1.8 mm (Table IV). To assess sensitivity to interconnect technology, the frame-work is further evaluated by varying TSV resistance, TSV pitch, and BGA pitch across representative ranges. The re-sulting bottleneck layer, interconnect loss, and end-to-end efficiency are summarized in Table V. The results indicate that the primary conclusions remain robust across the evaluated range of interconnect technology assumptions. 

B. VR Placement and Spatial Effects 

The geometry of the VR cell also impacts performance. Among the possible m×n array configurations within the sys-tem area, balanced cells (aspect ratio ≈ 1) are preferred, as they minimize elongated RDL routes and reduce distribution loss and minimize voltage drops. For non-square load systems, the m×n = M array aspect ratio should be matched as closely as practical to that of the load-system footprint, ensuring that VR-to-POL routing distances remain more uniformly distributed across the system. The footprint of each cell is determined by the largest components (switches or inductors). Accordingly, these components should be carefully selected or designed to enable balanced cells, ensuring both efficient routing and uniform distribution. The optimized floorplan for 70 VRs is shown in Fig. 12. Finally, spatial variation across the load system is captured by partitioning the chiplet into multiple POL regions. While a fully detailed model would require treating each transistor as an individual load, in practice the system can be partitioned into a modest number of regions with high accuracy [47]. In this work, the load is divided into 100 POL segments, as illustrated in Fig. 12. Current is primarily supplied by nearby VRs, which creates a dual behavior across the system: VRs near the center supply multiple surrounding POLs and exhibit higher conversion losses, while VRs near the perimeter carry less current and show reduced loss [48]. Conversely, central POLs benefit from multiple parallel current paths, whereas corner POLs have fewer nearby VRs, leading to nearly 2×

higher routing losses. The spatial voltage drop across the system for VPD with a single VR and DVPD with 70 distributed VRs is illustrated in Fig. 13a and Fig. 13b, respectively. DVPD reduces the voltage drop by approximately 1.5× with IR drops below 2.7% and 

L di dt drops below 9%. Strategically placed edge decoupling capacitors can further reduce the worst-case transient voltage drop. As a representative feasibility estimate, for the evaluated 1 kW, 1 V system, supporting 25–33% of the full-load transient current using deep-trench capacitors with reported capacitance densities of at least 100 fF/μm 2 [49] requires approximately 28–37 mm 2 (5.6–7.4% of the 500 mm 2 load footprint). Since the output-capacitor layer remains substan-tially underutilized in the evaluated DVPD configurations (see Fig. 2), this capacitance can be accommodated with limited impact on the overall footprint. Assuming the transient voltage drop scales approximately with the unsupported transient current, supporting 25–33% of the full-load transient current is estimated to reduce the worst-case transient voltage drop from 9% to 6–7%. 

C. Power Loss Distribution 

System-wide power loss distribution for the traditional and DVPD architectures, evaluated using the unified end-to-end efficiency boundary defined in Table I, is shown in Fig. 14. The traditional reference architecture employs atwo-stage 48 V →12 V →1 V conversion chain, consisting of a transformer-based front-end converter and a multi-phase motherboard buck converter with an assumed total 90% VR conversion efficiency. Once the VR-to-POL lateral routing losses are included within the unified end-to-end efficiency boundary, the overall system efficiency falls below 70% (see Fig. 14). The DVPD configurations, A1, A2, and A3, employ 70 horizontally distributed VRs with vertically stacked compo-nents, operating with 48 V, 24 V, and 12 V inputs, respectively. For A2 and A3, the first-stage conversion (48 V →24 V and 

Fig. 12: Optimized floorplan designed with the automated DVPD framework to deliver 1 kW at 1 V, to a 500 mm 2 load system, illustrating conversion and routing loss distribution. 12 

Fig. 13: Spatial voltage drop across a 1-kW, 1-V load system: (a) VPD architecture with a single VR; (b) DVPD architecture with 70 distributed VRs. 48 V →12 V, respectively) is performed using highly efficient (∼98%) transformer-based platform converters, and the corre-sponding 2% loss is included in the overall VR conversion losses. Accordingly, all architectures are evaluated using a consistent end-to-end accounting methodology, enabling direct comparison of system-wide power delivery efficiency. Among the DVPD variants, A2 (24 V →1 V) and A3

(12 V →1 V) achieve higher efficiencies of 86% and 87.6%, respectively. However, these configurations require nearly 75% of the load-die area for VICs and routing, raising concerns regarding fabrication reliability and thermal stress. By com-parison, A1 (48 V →1 V) achieves 84% end-to-end efficiency while occupying only 54% of the load-die area, representing the most balanced design in terms of efficiency, scalability, and integration feasibility. These results demonstrate that dis-tributed and vertically stacked architectures are able to signif-icantly reduce losses while maintaining practical footprint and packaging constraints. 

D. Thermal Feasibility 

The thermal behavior of the DVPD system is dominated by the power switches, which account for more than 50% of the conversion loss in A1 (Fig. 11(b)). Consequently, the spatial non-uniformity in per-VR losses shown in Fig. 12 results in non-uniform heating, with hotspots concentrated near the center of the DVPD footprint and within the GaN switch lay-ers. Under isothermal conditions, the 70-VR A1 configuration exhibits a total system loss of 185 W, corresponding to an end-to-end efficiency of 84.6%. Without thermal management, the resulting junction temperature exceeds 110°C, increasing temperature-dependent conduction and switching losses to 225 W and reducing efficiency to 81.6%. These results highlight the importance of the electrothermal co-design loop shown in Fig. 4. To evaluate thermal feasibility, the optimized DVPD geom-etry and component-level loss distributions generated by the proposed framework are coupled to the thermal-fluidic solver of [25], [26]. In the example implementation of [25], [26], substrate-embedded micro-channel cooling is employed, with cooling channels positioned adjacent to the GaN switch layer (PL 2), as illustrated in Figs. 2 and 10. For the evaluated 1 kW 

A1 configuration, the thermal analysis indicates a coolant flow rate of 1.6 g/s, limiting the maximum junction temperature to approximately 84°C. At thermal steady state, the total system loss converges to 210 W, corresponding to an end-to-end efficiency of 82.6%. A detailed analysis of the DVPD thermal behavior, including spatial temperature distributions, temperature-dependent loss convergence, and cooling opti-mization, is provided in [26]. 

E. Scalability 

The developed DVPD design framework is inherently scal-able to the multi-kilowatt demands of wafer-scale systems such as Cerebras [2] and the heterogeneous wafer-scale platforms outlined in the HIR roadmap [1]. For example, scaling from the 1 kW reference case to a 25 kW system at 2 A/mm 2

requires approximately 1,750 VRs, distributed across chiplets according to their thermal design power (TDP). Since the power handled per VR remains constant, the conversion ef-ficiency is largely preserved as load power increases, enabling the DVPD system to maintain uniform performance across a wide power range, as illustrated in Fig. 15. The breakdown of power losses highlights two key scalability trends. First, conversion losses remain nearly constant with load power, as each VR processes the same power regardless of system scale. Second, supply-to-VR routing losses increase linearly with system power, since more current must be delivered from the system edges. This effect is strongly dependent on the input voltage: with 48 V supply ( A1), the RMS current delivered to the VR layer is two times lower than with 12 V supply (A3), reducing distribution losses by approximately 4 ×. As a result, high-voltage delivery ( A1) is preferable for wafer-scale 

Fig. 14: End-to-end power loss across traditional and DVPD architectures evaluated using the unified efficiency bound-ary defined in Table I. Bars show the percentage of total platform input power dissipated across end-to-end conversion and distribution stages. Pie charts illustrate the breakdown of VR conduction and switching losses for the A1-DVPD architecture. 13 

Fig. 15: Percent of power loss in a DVPD system using architectures A1 (48V/1V) and A3 (48V/12V/1V), delivering a load power ranging between 1-50 kW at 2 A/mm 2.systems exceeding 20 kW, where lateral routing distances and currents dominate overall loss. The maximum current density demonstrated at efficiencies above 80% in this work is 2 A/mm², corresponding to the lower bound of the target 2–4 A/mm² range. The proposed framework can explore lower and higher current-density op-erating points by modifying design variables such as the number of vertically stacked layers, inductor density, and switching frequency. However, these choices introduce prac-tical tradeoffs: higher density generally increases conduction, switching, and magnetic losses, thereby reducing efficiency and increasing local heat generation. As a result, the attainable current density is ultimately bounded not only by electrical constraints, but also by thermal feasibility, since localized hot spots can exceed 100 °C. These findings demonstrate that the proposed DVPD frame-work not only preserves efficiency while scaling to tens of kilowatts, but also provides a systematic means to evaluate architectural tradeoffs and identify the most viable configura-tions. Future advances in inductor and capacitor technology will be essential to fully realize these scalability benefits. V. C ONCLUSION 

This work presents a comprehensive design and optimiza-tion framework for distributed vertical power delivery (DVPD) in advanced HPC and AI platforms. The framework integrates compact analytical models with automated floorplanning to co-optimize switching frequency, modular inductor scaling, interconnect allocation, and regulator placement, enabling sys-tematic exploration of performance–density tradeoffs. Several key findings emerge from this study. A methodology is established for selecting the minimum VR switching fre-quency that maintains ripple constraints across diverse topolo-gies and packaging technologies. A modular inductor approach is introduced that maximizes current density and area utiliza-tion through scalable parallel integration. Analysis of vertical interconnects further reveals that required footprint scales with RMS rather than average current, providing guidance for balancing intermediate voltage selection against interconnect demand. In addition, floorplanning studies show that balanced cell geometries (aspect ratio ≈ 1) reduce routing losses and improve density, while automated placement exposes spatial loss variation across the system. System-level evaluation confirms that DVPD achieves sub-stantially higher efficiency than conventional lateral or lumped vertical delivery. In particular, the evaluated 48 V/1 V DVPD system with 70 distributed regulators demonstrates 84% end-to-end efficiency, compared to less than 70% efficiency in representative centralized systems. Scalability analysis further shows that efficiency is preserved up to 50 kW operation at 2 A/mm 2, with high-voltage delivery providing the most favorable balance between conversion efficiency, interconnect area, and routing loss. Overall, the proposed DVPD framework demonstrates the feasibility of delivering tens of kilowatts at high efficiency and density in next-generation heterogeneous HPC systems, while providing practical guidance for packaging integration, power converter design, and architectural tradeoffs. REFERENCES [1] Heterogeneous Integration Roadmap. (2024) Chapter 22: 2D/3D power delivery for heterogeneous integration. Available online: https://eps.ieee. org/wp-content/uploads/2025/11/HIR 2024 ch22 2D-3D.pdf. [2] M. Khairy, “TPU vs GPU vs Cerebras vs Graphcore: A fair comparison between ML hardware,” Medium , 2020. [3] S. Krishnakumar and I. Partin-Vaisband, “Vertical power delivery for emerging packaging and integration platforms-power conversion and dis-tribution,” in IEEE International System-on-Chip Conference (SOCC) ,2023, pp. 1–6. [4] K. Radhakrishnan, M. Swaminathan, and B. K. Bhattacharyya, “Power delivery for high-performance microprocessors—challenges, solutions, and future trends,” IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 655–671, 2021. [5] K. Radhakrishnan, “Recent advances in IVR solutions for high power microprocessors,” February 2024, Invited talk. [6] J. Choquette, “NVIDIA Hopper H100 GPU: Scaling performance,” IEEE Micro , vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 9–17, 2023. [7] J. Geng, R. Mandrioli, C. Jiang, and M. Ricco, “Vertically stacked dual-bus DC-DC converter for data center high-current power delivery,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics , 2025, Early access. [8] C. Kong, W. Huan, J. Wang, D. Li, H. Sun, X. Zhang, F. Ye, and K. Lin, “A vertical power delivery architecture for high performance computing,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics , vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 6663–74, 2025. [9] X. Liu, J. Yu, M. Gong, N. Butzen, S. Weng, H. K. Krishnamurthy, K. Ravichandran, R. H. Ahangharnejhad, W. James, P. Christopher                                                      

> et al. , “A monolithic 5.7 A/mm 291% peak efficiency scalable multistage modular switched capacitor voltage regulator for base die vertical power delivery in 3D-ICs,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits , 2025. [10] Y. Safari and B. Vaisband, “A Robust Integrated Power Delivery Methodology for 3-D ICs,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems , vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 287–295, 2023. [11] ——, “Power delivery for silicon interconnect fabric,” in IEEE Interna-tional Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) , 2021, pp. 1–5. [12] S. Krishnakumar, M. Choi, R. R. Khorasani, R. Sharma, M. Swami-nathan, S. Kumar, and I. Partin-Vaisband, “Design considerations for DC-DC voltage regulators in distributed vertical power delivery sys-tems,” in IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) , 2024, pp. 1–5. [13] S. Krishnakumar and I. Partin-Vaisband, “Power-integrity model-ing of vr faults in high-performance applications,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.24877 , 2026. [14] ——, “Dynamic power management methodology for distributed ver-tical power delivery in high-performance computing systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.24874 , 2026. [15] M. Choi, S. Krishnakumar, R. R. Khorasani, M. Swaminathan, I. Partin-Vaisband, and S. Kumar, “Substrate-embedded microfluidic cooling of distributed vertical power delivery architectures for high-performance computing processors,” IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology , 2025. [16] M. Choi, S. Krishnakumar, R. R. Khorasani, I. Partin-Vaisband, R. Sharma, M. Swaminathan, and S. Kumar, “Thermal analysis of high current vertical power delivery network with embedded microchannel cooling,” in IEEE Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermome-chanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems (ITherm) , 2024, pp. 1–8. 14

[17] O. Kirshenboim and M. M. Peretz, “High-efficiency nonisolated con-verter with very high step-down conversion ratio,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics , vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3683–3690, 2017. [18] R. Das and H.-P. Le, “A Regulated 48V/1V/100A 90.9%-Efficient Hy-brid Converter for POL Applications in Data Centers and Telecommuni-cation Systems,” in IEEE Annual Applied Power Electronics Conference and Exposition (APEC) , March 2019, pp. 1997––2001. [19] M. Gong, X. Zhang, and A. Raychowdhury, “A 90.4% peak efficiency 48V/1V three-level hybrid dickson converter with gradient descent run-time optimizer and GaN/Si hybrid conversion,” in IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology and Circuits (VLSI Symposium) , 2022, pp. 176–177. [20] J. Baek, Y. Elasser, K. Radhakrishnan, H. Gan, J. P. Douglas, H. K. Krishnamurthy, X. Li, S. Jiang, C. R. Sullivan, and M. Chen, “Vertical stacked LEGO-PoL CPU voltage regulator,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics , vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 6305–6322, 2021. [21] G. Pillonnet and P. Mercier, “Analytical benchmarking of direct hybrid switched-capacitor DC-DC converters,” IEEE Open Journal of Power Electronics , 2024. [22] Y. Zhu, Z. Ye, T. Ge, R. Abramson, and R. C. Pilawa-Podgurski, “A multi-phase cascaded series-parallel (CaSP) hybrid converter for direct 48 V to point-of-load applications,” in IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE) , 2021, pp. 1973–1980. [23] C. Parisi, “Multiphase buck design from start to finish (part 1),” Texas Instruments, Application Report SLVA882 , vol. 55, 2017. [24] A. Lotfi, S. Krishnakumar, A. G. Nazari, M. B. Shadmand, and I. Partin-Vaisband, “Interleaved resonant fcml converter architecture for scal-able vertical power delivery in high-performance computing systems,” in 2026 IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conference and Exposition (APEC) . IEEE, 2026, pp. 2495–2500. [25] M. Choi, S. Krishnakumar, Y. Popryho, R. R. Khorasani, M. Swami-nathan, I. Partin-Vaisband, and S. Kumar, “Automated electro-thermal modeling framework of distributed vertical power delivery architectures with substrate-embedded microfluidic cooling,” in IEEE Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Elec-tronic Systems (ITherm) , 2025, pp. 1–8. [26] ——, “Self-consistent electrothermal modeling of distributed vertical power delivery architecture with substrate-embedded microfluidic cool-ing,” IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology , 2025. [27] A. O. Watanabe, M. Ali, S. Y. B. Sayeed, R. R. Tummala, and M. R. Pulugurtha, “A review of 5G front-end systems package integration,” 

IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Tech-nology , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 118–133, 2020. [28] R. R. Khorasani, X. Li, M. Al-Juwhari, W. Murti, J. Cha, and M. Swami-nathan, “Embedded silicon chip capacitors in glass package for vertical power delivery,” in IEEE Electronic Components and Technology Con-ference (ECTC) , 2025, pp. 416–423. [29] B. DEPROSPO, “Saras embedded stile tm ipd technology for high per-formance power delivery networks,” IMAPSOURCE PROCEEDINGS: IMAPS-International Microelectronics Assembly and Packaging Society ,2024. [30] X. Li, X. Jia, J. W. Kim, S. Erdogan, K.-S. Moon, M. B. Jordan, and M. Swaminathan, “Glass interposer with multiple embedded dies for mmWave applications,” IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology , 2024. [31] S. Abdelzaher, M. Gharib, and I. Partin-Vaisband, “Hybrid voltage regulators for high performance computing: Analytical models and design methodology,” in IEEE Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC) , 2025, pp. 2286–2292. [32] I. Vaisband and E. G. Friedman, “Heterogeneous method for energy efficient distribution of on-chip power supplies and power network on-chip system for scalable power delivery,” 2017, uS patent 9,785,161. [Online]. Available: https://patents.google.com/patent/US9785161B2/en [33] S. Krishnakumar, M. Choi, R. R. Khorasani, R. Sharma, M. Swami-nathan, S. Kumar, and I. Partin-Vaisband, “Vertical power delivery for high performance computing systems with buck-derived regulators,” in 

IEEE Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC) , 2024, pp. 2136–2142. [34] S. Jangam and S. S. Iyer, “Silicon-interconnect fabric for fine-pitch (≤10 μm) heterogeneous integration,” IEEE Transactions on Compo-nents, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology , vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 727–738, 2021. [35] R. Farjadrad, M. Kuemerle, and B. Vinnakota, “A bunch-of-wires (bow) interface for interchiplet communication,” IEEE Micro , vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 15–24, 2019. [36] E. A. Burton, G. Schrom, F. Paillet, J. Douglas, W. J. Lambert, K. Rad-hakrishnan, and M. J. Hill, “FIVR–fully integrated voltage regulators on 4th generation Intel® Core TM SoCs,” in IEEE Applied Power Electronics Conference and Exposition (APEC) , 2014, pp. 432–439. [37] K. Bharath, K. Radhakrishnan, M. J. Hill, P. Chatterjee, H. Hariri, S. Venkataraman, H. T. Do, L. Wojewoda, and S. Srinivasan, “Integrated voltage regulator efficiency improvement using coaxial magnetic com-posite core inductors,” in IEEE Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC) , 2021, pp. 1286–1292. [38] P. Murali, V. Avula, M. Ahmed, M. D. Losego, M. Swaminathan, C. Alvarez, Y. Oishi, T. Uemura, R. Nagatsuka, and N. Watanabe, “Fabrication and characterization of package embedded inductors for integrated voltage regulators,” in IEEE Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC) , 2022, pp. 301–305. [39] R. Rasheedi and I. Partin-Vaisband, “High aspect ratio spiral inductor with progressive turn widths for embedded power converters,” in IEEE Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC) , 2025, pp. 2271–2277. [40] P. Pan, C. Chen, J. Gu, M. Liu, and X. Li, “High-performance 3-d silicon-embedded coupled solenoid inductors with inserted magnetic core,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices , vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 3169– 3174, 2024. [41] Y. He, R. Wu, Z. Zhong, H. Zhang, and F. Bai, “On-chip coupled solenoid inductors for integrated power conversion,” IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices , vol. 68, no. 12, pp. 6292–6295, 2021. [42] Y. Ding, X. Wang, Y. Zhu, M. Chen, S. Li, and M. G. Allen, “Through-silicon via coupled inductors for vertical power delivery,” IEEE Trans-actions on Power Electronics , 2026. [43] V. Avula, P. Murali, and M. Swaminathan, “Design and demonstration of dual-core spiral package-embedded inductors for 48V-to-1V and 12V-to-1V integrated voltage regulators,” Authorea Preprints , 2024. [44] C. A. Barros, P. Murali, M. Swaminathan, O. Yusuke, T. Junichi, N. Ryo, and N. Watanabe, “Embedded inductors using composite magnetic materials for 12–1-V integrated voltage regulators,” IEEE Transactions on Components, Packaging and Manufacturing Technology , vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 2183–2192, 2021. [45] Efficient Power Conversion Corporation (EPC). (2023, October) Gallium nitride (GaN) power devices. [Online]. Available: https: //epc-co.com/epc/products/gan-fets-and-ics [46] D. Jauregui, B. Wang, and R. Chen, “Power loss calculation with com-mon source inductance consideration for synchronous buck converters,” 

Application Report (SLPA009A), Texas Instruments , 2011. [47] S. Krishnakumar, Y. Popryho, and I. Partin-Vaisband, “System archi-tecture optimization for vertical power delivery,” in Proceedings of the Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI , 2024, pp. 351–352. [48] S. K¨ ose and E. G. Friedman, “Fast algorithms for power grid analysis based on effective resistance,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems , 2010, pp. 3661–3664. [49] K. Kannan and S. S. Iyer, “Deep trench capacitors in silicon interconnect fabric,” in 2020 IEEE 70th Electronic Components and Technology Conference (ECTC) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 2295–2301.