Title: 2605.16062v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.16062v1

Published Time: Mon, 18 May 2026 01:10:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
Article type: Original Article 

# In -situ correlative SEM/KPFM for semiconductor devices and 

# 2D heterostructures 

Prabhu Prasad Swain 1, Nahid Hosseini 1, Evel ine . S Mayner 2, Aleksandra Radenovic 2, Marcos 

Penedo 1,* and Georg E. Fantner 1,* 

> 1

Laboratory of Bio - and Nano - Instrumentation, Institute of Bioengineering, École 

Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 

> 2

Laboratory of Nanoscale Biology , Institute of Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale 

de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 

*Corresponding author.  E-mail:  georg.fantner@epfl.ch , marcos.penedo@epfl.ch 

# Highlights 

⚫ We demonstrate in -situ , single -pass heterodyne -Kelvin probe force microscopy performed 

inside a scanning electron microscope environment using self -sensing cantilevers .

⚫ We overcome capacitive crosstalk in piezo -resistive cantilevers through heterodyne 

detection, enabling quantitative, simultaneous mapping of surface potential and 

topography. 

⚫ We apply the in -situ SEM KPFM method to study semiconductor circuits and 2D 

heterostructures under vacuum conditions. 

# Graphical Abstract Abstract 

Correlative nanoscale surface characterization benefits from simultaneously measuring 

electronic and structural properties in the same environment , a capability that is essential for 

modern -day materials science and semiconductor failure analysis . In -situ AFM -SEM 

measurements facilitated by self -sensing cantilevers offer great potential here ; however, they 

are limited due to their inherent capacitive crosstalk. Here, we demonstrate for the first time 

the in -situ implementation of single -pass heterodyne Kelvin probe force microscopy inside a

scanning electron microscope , using piezo -resistive cantilevers. We overcome the capacitive 

crosstalk prevalent in piezo -resistive cantilevers by demodulating excitation and detection to 

simultaneous ly map surface topography and contact potential difference for correlation with 

compositional analysis . We systematically compare different operational modes of this 

heterodyne technique , elucidating their spat ial resolution, signal sensitivity , and signal -to -noise 

ratio . The integrated approach yields except ional signal quality and reveals how electron beam 

scan parameters can directly influence surface potential contrast . We demonstrate this 

correlative analysis workflow on two -dimensional heterostructures and semiconductor cir cuit s.

This work establishes a robust and versatile correlative imaging mode for in -situ Kelvin force 

and topography imaging inside a scanning electron microscope for next -generation 

semiconductor device analysis and materials science .

# Keywords 

Heterodyne Kelvin probe force microscopy ; correlative nanoscale characterisation ;

semiconductor analysis; self -sensing cantilevers ; combined in -situ atomic force and scanning 

electron microscopy ; 2D heterostructures 1 Introduction 

Nanoscale analysis is fun damental for the characteriz ation of newly synthesized materials ,

surface coatings , and highly engineered semiconductor devices . The atomic force 

microscope [1] (AFM) along with the surface topography of the sample , can map together 

various properties such as electrical conductivity [2 –4] , elasticity [5 –8] , thermal 

conductivity [9,10] , surface potential [11 –18] , magnetization [19 –21] , and capacitance [22,23] ,

using different cantilever coatings . On the other hand, the  scanning electron micr oscope [24] 

(SEM ) is a versatile instrument  commonly  used for microstructur al  characterization, elemental 

composition, crystal orientation, and large -scale quality assurance.  Advancement s in AFM, 

SEM, and in their combined ex -situ or in -situ approaches have increased interest in a corre lative 

approach for a full -scale characterisation of alloys [25] , ceramics [26] , oxides [27] ,

nanoparticles [28] , and metal oxides [29] . This enables correlation of structural imaging with 

functional imaging, especially conductivity, surface potential, thermal properties, and chemical 

properties. A combination of such in -situ correlative analysis has been essential in the past [30] ,

and is of particular importance in the coming decades [31] , especially in semiconductor 

analysis .

Work function , defined as the minimum energy required to remove an electron from the outer 

layers of the electronic shell of a material to the vacuum . It gives a direct estimate of surface 

defects, dopant concentra tion, and insights into surface -sensitive chemistry , such as surface 

adsorbents or contaminants , useful in semiconductor and two -dimensional ( 2D ) material 

characterization . Work function can be determined on a nanoscopic level using SPM, where 

the cantilever tip acts as a Kelvin probe [32] to sense the electrical forces arising from potential 

differences [11] . In Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) , a conductive cantilever tip (to 

which an AC potential is applied with respect to the surface) ra ster scans across the sample, 

and a feedback loop nullif ies each local interaction with an additional DC voltage [11,13] . The energy resolution of such scanning KPFM contact potential difference (CPD) maps range s

from about 1-20 meV, with a spatial resolution of <10 nm [13,33] . While ex -situ correlation of 

KPFM and SEM ha s been enabling the characterization of advanced semiconductor 

devices [34] , perovskite solar cells [35] , and corrosion studies [36,37] , an in -situ 

complementarity wou ld be desirable for challenging samples prone to rapid oxidation . F or the 

sake of correlatio n, repeatability , and throughput, the in-situ combinatio n of AFM -SEM offers 

great potential [30,31] , albeit the implementation of in -situ SEM/ KPFM remains 

challenging [38] .

Spatially constrained AFM integrations , such as inside a SEM chamber , p iezo -resistive 

detection [39] methods using self -sensing cantilevers avoid the requirement of a bulky optical 

beam readout [40] system. S uch s elf -sensing cantilevers with traces to feed an electrical signal 

to the tip have already been used for scanni ng capacitance microscopy (SCM) [41] and 

conductive (C -) AFM [42] , and also for scanning gate microscopy by means of a shielded 

conductive tip [43] . However, such configuration s suffer from capacitive crosstalk , which 

scales linearly with frequency . This capacitive crosstalk causes a critical obstacle in traditional 

homodyne single -pass and dual -pass KPFM measurements, as the capacitive crosstalk by far 

exceeds the small force due to the CPD. To overcome the impact of the capacitive crosstalk in 

self -sensing probes for KPFM measurements inside the SEM environment, we have developed 

single -pass in -situ CPD imaging in heterodyne [44] (H -) KPFM configuration us ing custom tri -

layer piezo -resistive readout cantilevers [45] .

# 2 Experimental methods 

2.1 Fabrication of self -sensing tri -layer cantilevers for in -situ KPFM 

Tri -layer self -sensing cantilevers were fabricated using a two -wafer process [45] . In brief, t wo 

⟨100 ⟩ Si wafers were coated with 100 nm low -stress silicon nitride ( LSNT ), see supplementary Fig. S1 (a) . On one wafer ( the sensor wafer ), a polysilicon /borosilicate glass ( BSG ) thin -film 

stack was deposited , where BSG served as a solid -state dopant source during the subsequent 

thermal annealing of the polysilicon strain sensors. The strain sensors were defined through a 

sequence comprising: (i) dry etching of the BSG layer , (ii) shallow KOH etching of the 

polysilicon to expose and shape the piezoresistive gauges, and (iii) Cr/Au lift -off metallization 

to form chip -level interconnects and complete a full Wheatstone bridge configuration . A 4μm 

layer of benzocyclobutane (BCB ) was then spin -coated on the sensor wafer . This wafer was 

bonded to the second silicon nitride ( SiN ) wafer and thermally hard -cured, forming a 

SiN/BCB/SiN tri -layer stack that encapsulat es the sens ing elements . The cantilever chip body 

and integrated cantilever tip were then defined from the remaining bulk silicon via anisotropic 

KOH etching. A metal hard mask was used to define the cantilever outline and bond pads, 

followed by dry etching to release the self -sensing tri -layer membranes. Finally, a titanium -

platinum coating was evaporated on the tip side through a shadow mask to render the tip 

conductive for KPFM. Fig. S1(b) shows a false coloured SEM image of the cantilever . The 

cantilever s are bonded to a PCB with connectors for use with the AFM inside the SEM (Fig. 

S1(c)). 

2.2 Samples ’ preparation 

Calibration samples of planar gold ( Au ) islands surrounded by aluminium (Al) were custom -

fabricated using photolithography, e-beam evaporation , and lift -off. Germanium (Ge) 

nanowire s of varying widths grown on Si ⟨110 ⟩ and Si ⟨111 ⟩ substrates were imaged t o evaluate 

the spatial resolution of the KPFM inside the SEM environment [46] . A commercial imaging 

sensor (IGS sensor AR0233ATSC17XUEA1 -DPBR , onsemi) was decapsulated by 

mechanically polish ing at an angle and was generously provided by NenoVision [47] , Czech 

Republic . Additionally, 2D heterostructures [48] with hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) and neutron -irradiated hBN flakes , and PbI 2 on indium tin oxide (ITO) substrates were used for 

further assessment of KPFM imaging and surface potential contrast. 

2.3 SEM imaging 

SEM imaging was performed using a Zeiss Crossbeam 550L dual -beam system at a chamber 

pressure of 1.8 × 10⁻⁶ mbar. Accelerati on voltages of 1 .5 -5 kV and beam currents of 40 -500p A

were used to achieve surface -sensitive imaging. Images were acquired using either the InLens 

or secondary electron (SE) detector with acquisition times of 0.5 -1.5 s per frame .

2.4 AFM /KPFM imaging 

We use a modified tip -scanning Quantum Design AFSEM [49,50] , (generously provided by 

Quantum Design [49] , San Diego) , fitted onto the chamber door of the SEM setup described 

above for the in -situ AFM/KPFM /SEM measurements (Fig. 1(a)) . This AFM is operated using 

an open hardware SPM controller [51,52] developed in -house at EPFL . A Zurich HF2 LI lock -

in amplifier (LIA) (Zurich Instruments, Zürich, Switzerland) pr ovided mechanical excitation 

(V AC = 2 V) to a shaker pie zo and electrical excitation (V AC = 2 V or 3 V ) to the Pt -coated 

cantilever tip, while performing KPFM feedback. KPFM was performed in heterodyne mode 

using piezo -resistive sensing tri -layer cantilevers coated with a Pt coating (~ 10 0 nm). The 

cantilevers (220 μm × 40 μm × 4 μm) had a dynamic spring constant of ~ 3 N/m, a 6 μm tip 

height , and the first and second eigenmodes were between 50 -75 kHz and 330 -420 kHz, 

respectively. Measurements were conducted in single -pass mode, simultaneously recording 

topography and surface potential. For single -pass , heterodyne KPFM operation [44] , an AC 

electrostatic modulation frequency fₑ is applied to the cantilever tip with fₑ ≪ f1, where f1 is the 

resonance frequency of the first mechanical eigenmode of the cantilever , Fig . 1(b). The 

mechanical deflection signal is demo dulated by the LIA referenced to f h = f 1 ± fₑ, to extract the 

response induced by the CPD . Fig . 1(c) shows the amplitude (R) and corresponding X and Y components of the detected CPD signal as a function of the applied DC offs et sent to the tip. 

We choose the phase of the detected signal such that most of the signal is in the in -phase (X)

component of the signal to have a monotonic function for performing the feedback. The X 

component at f h is then used as the input for a proportional -integral feedback loop that adjusts 

the DC bias (V DC ) to nullify the signal , yielding the CPD . Fig . 1(d) re presents a single -pass 

heterodyne KPFM image of Ge nanowires on Si, correlated with SEM/EDS analysis. 

Electrostatic force microscopy [53] (EFM) images can also be obtained without DC 

compensation by recording the raw detection amplitude , revealing buried inhomogeneities in 

nanowire fabrication (shown using arrows) (Fig. S2 ). 

2.5 Image processing 

AFM i mages were processed in Gwyddion [54] . After plane levelling the height images, we 

removed the line -by -line offset using a median correction method and subtracted the 

background tilt or bow using first - and second -order polynomial fittings. Fiji [55] is used to 

enhance contrast without changing the colour histogram for SEM images. The 3D renderings 

used in the figure panels have been generated using the 3D view and overlay with light function 

in Gwyddion 2.69. 

# 3 Results and Discussion 

3.1 Characterization of electrical -mechanical crosstalk in self -sensing cantilevers used for 

in -situ KPFM measurements in SEM 

A key feature of the tri -layer self -sensing cantilevers is that the deflection -sensing electronics 

are hermetically encapsulated within the polymer core, enabling metal coating of the cantilever 

and tip without electrical shorting (Fig. 2(a), (b)). Although the tip excitation is resistively 

decoupled from the readout by the SiN layers (~100 nm) and the ~4 μm polymer core, 

capacitive crosstalk persists at higher frequencies. Th e capacitive crosstalk in self -sensing cantilevers induces a false signal in homodyne KPFM 

measurements where electrical excitation and detection occur at the same frequency . Fig. 2(c) 

shows the mechanical response of the cantilever , measured optically via laser beam deflec tion 

detection, under AC excitation of the tip at various frequencies. The contact potential difference 

between the tip and the sample results in an electrostatic force that is sufficient to excite the 

cantilever when the electrical excitation f e corresponds to one of the cantilever’s resonance 

frequencies. However, when th is response is measured through the Wheatstone bridge 

electronics , the true mec hanical signal is masked by capacitive coupling between the electrical 

exci tation and the readout (Fig. 2 (d) ). In the self -sensing tri -layer cantilevers, t his capacitive 

crosstalk arises from stray capacitive coupling between conductive traces carrying the electrical 

excitation to the tip and the cantilever deflection sensing electronics , as well as the capacitive 

coupling of the traces to the cantilever substrate . It is important to note that this crosstalk does 

not reflect an actual motion of the cantilever. The apparent distortion of the cantilever 

amplitude at resonance arises from the differen ce in phase between the true mechanical signal 

and the capacitive crosstalk. At resonance, the actual cantilever deflection signal experiences 

a rapid 90 ° phase drop, while the capacitive crosstalk remains nearly unchanged, result ing in 

an apparent anti -resonance (~ 53 kHz ). A similar behavio ur has been observed for active 

cantilevers with electrothermal actuation [56] .

3.2 Use of heterodyne detection for KPFM using piezo -resistive cantilevers 

In all KPFM measurements, a background capacitive interaction exists between the cantilever 

(including its coating) and the sample surface, contributing to the measured electrostatic signal ,

and directly affecting the actual cantilever motion . Many techniques of KPFM imaging have 

been developed, such as amplitude detected and force modulated [57] (AM -) or pulse 

frequency [58] (PF -) or PeakForce based multiparametric [59] or f requency modulated [60] 

(FM -) or heterodyne [44] KPFM; however, only FM -KPFM and H -KPFM can reduce this contribution by probing the force gradient rather than the force itself . In self -sensing 

cantilevers , due to integrated sensing elements , an additional electronic crosstalk arises from 

parasitic coupling between the tip excitation and the deflection readout. This crosstalk , which 

is only on the signal level and doesn’t describe the physical motion of the cantilever, occurs at 

the excitation frequency fₑ and can dominate the detected signal, overwhelming the true KPFM 

response and making homodyne detection ineffective. 

In contrast to homodyne detection, heterodyne KPFM [44] (H -KPFM) measures the 

electrostatic interaction at a frequency distinct from the electrical excitation fe, thereby 

decoupling excitation from detection . This offers an elegant solution to circumvent the electro -

mechanical capacitive crosstalk in the piezoresistive self -sensing cantilevers. Additionally, the 

H-KPFM mode also provide s better spatial resolution of the KPFM maps , reduces 

contributions from stray capacitances , and enables faster single -pass imaging compared to 

dual -pass measurements [14,61] .

In H -KPFM, the electrostatic potential is measured by compensating the cantilever DC 

potential offset such that the amplitude of the cantilever oscillation at a heterodyne (sum or 

difference) frequency fh reaches zero. The choice of fe determines whether fh lies at the second 

eigenmode (overtone configuration) or within the resonance bandwidth of a driven mode 

(sideband configuration). B oth approaches provid e large detectable deflections at low AC bias .

The maximum bandwidth that can be used for the heterodyne demodulator must be lower than 

fh to avoid the contribution of mechanical oscillation to the CPD signal. The low Q -factor of 

the tri -layer cantilever makes various flexible configurations possible . The schematics in Fig .

3(a) depict how different heterodyne configurations compare with AM -KPFM in lift mode .

The choice of heterodyne configuration depends on environmental conditions and the available 

cantilever drive and detection electronics . We quantify the KPFM measurement performance 

of the different configurations by sweeping the DC offset and record ing the resulting amplitude at fh (Fig. 3( c)) determin ed at Au and Al regions (indicated in Fig. 3(b) ). The heterodyne 

overtone configurations produce better results compared to heterodyne sideband 

configurations. Additionally, H -overtone mode allows further separat ion of excitation and 

detection frequencies , enabling high er bandwidth for detection of the signal compared to 

sideband configurations, and, thus, faster scans (8 –10 μm/s in vacuum) [14] . In addition, the 

choice of the AC amplitude, the tip -sample distance, and the sideband frequency all affect the 

minimum detectable CPD (see Fig. S3 ). 

3.3 Correlative KPFM -SEM analysis of CMOS devices 

One key application of KPFM is semiconductor device and failure analysis [62] . To 

demonstrate the capabilities of our in -situ SEM/KPFM , we analy sed a decapsulated CMOS 

image sensor AR0233ATSC17XUEA1 -DPBR, onsemi (Phoenix, Arizona, USA), prepared by 

angled mechanical polishing . Fig ure 4 compares the th ree imaging modalities , SEM/KPFM 

and AFM , measured in -situ . While the SEM secondary electron image at 5 kV and 500 pA 

(Fig . 4(a)) shows details of the devices, it is difficult to interpret the features. A comparison of 

the structures in the SEM image with the AFM topography (Fig . 4(b)) shows that features 

visible by SEM are partly due to subsurface contributions of the penetrating electrons. Bright 

features in the SEM zoom in (1), marked with a blue arrow, are virtually absent from the AFM 

topography image (2), implying that the SE -SEM contrast is due to materials contrast rather 

than surface topography. This is substantiated b y the fact that the features have a different 

contact potential difference in the KPFM image , Fig. 4(c) and zoom in (3) , indicating a different 

material composition . While the contrast in AFM topography is mainly a n artefact of 

differential polishing efficiencies in the materials, the SE -SEM contrast contains contributions 

of differences in secondary electron yield of the sub -surface features. This contrast is primarily 

due to a complex mix of electronic structure and inelastic scattering (indirect z -contrast) , local 

work function differences, electric fields around the junctions , and doping profiles near the surface. The contrast in the KPFM measurement is more directly linked to the local surface 

potential. In CMOS image sensors, this local surface potential is primarily due to the work 

function of the material, doping -induced Fermi level shifts, and surface band bending/trapped 

charges. While SE -SEM shows detailed contrast , it mixes many effects (SE yield, surface 

chemistry, doping, charging) . So, the physical origin is often ambiguous. This makes KPFM 

essential because it directly maps the local surface pote ntial/work function . It validates the 

meaning of the SEM image s by unambiguously identif ying electrostatic and doping -related 

contrast (as shown by arrows in Fig. 4(e) and S4) .

3. 4 Correlative analysis of 2D heterostructures deposited on Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) 

inside the SEM vacuum chamber 

In 2D material heterostructures (graphene, TMDs, hBN, etc.), device behaviour is governed by 

local work function alignment, charge transfer, band offsets, and trapped charge at 

interfaces [63] . These properties are further modulated by layer thickness, strain, electric fields, 

and interlayer electronic coupling [64] . KPFM directly maps these quantities spatially, while 

SEM provides structural context at high resolution. This makes correlative SEM/KPFM 

analysis of 2D heterostructure devices particularly relevant [48] . We fabricated a 2D 

heterostructure assembly comprising flakes of hexagonal boron nitride ( hBN ), neutron 

irradiated hBN (VB-), and PbI 2 on an ITO substrate, as s chematically represented in Fig. 5(a). 

SE -SEM imaging reveals clear contrast between the layered 2D PbI 2 and the hBN flakes ,

whereas the SE -SEM co ntrast between hBN and V B- hBN is minimal (Fig. 5(a)). AFM 

topography identifies terraces and step edges, while KPFM maps show distinct contact 

potential differences across flakes and boundaries, indicating local variations in work function 

and charge distribution (Fig. 5(b, c )) . Combined SEM, topography , and CPD imaging of the 

flake (marked in bold square in (a) reveals inhomogeneities such as delamination (shown with 

arrows), which is prominent in the CPD image and is missed by SE and topography imaging. This highlights the benefit of KPFM inside SEM to evaluate and cross -validate inferences from 

SE imaging of such heterostructures. Furthermore, KPFM imaging in vacuum conditions of 

such heterostructures reveals that, as expected , the surface potential can be tuned by combining 

hBN and irradiated hBN with PbI 2[48] . However, the measured surface potential is also 

strongly affected by how well the 2D material contacts the underlying surface (see arrows in 

Fig . 5( c)) , especially wrinkles and bubbles . This is of particular importance when fabricating 

electronic devices using 2D materials , where surface wrinkles and strain -induced changes in 

the band structure [65,66] can alter the device performance. The combination of SEM and 

KPFM , therefore , offers important insights for 2D device quality control. 

It should be noted, however, that exposure to the electron beam can alter the KPFM 

measurement. Figure 6(a) shows pristine hBN flakes deposited on ITO being surveyed with 

SEM to locate for AFM imaging. The area marked in dashed lines in Fig. 6(a) was imaged with 

AFM before electron irradiation , showing AFM topography ( Fig . 6( b)) and topography/ KPFM 

overlay (Fig . 6( c)). After a short electron beam exposure with a dosage of  1.9 × 10 −12 𝑚𝐶 /

μm 2 while taking the SEM image (Fig. 6( d)), the subsequent topography/ KPFM overlay of the 

measurement (Fig. 6(e) ) shows that the electron exposure results in a different CPD 

measurement in the exposed area (marked in a dashed box) . We observe similar change s in the 

measured CPD on Al/Au test structures ( see supplementary figure S5) , where it can last for 

several hours , as seen in supplementary figure S6 . Irradiating with ions from a focused ion 

beam (FIB) also changes the CPD measurement, see supplementary figures S7 and S8 .

Interpretation of CPD measurements in a correlative SEM and KPFM analysis, therefore , must 

take the history of SEM exposure into account. 

# 4 Discussions The use of self -sensing tri -layer cantilever s enables high -quality heterodyne KPFM 

measurements inside the vacuum environment of an SEM/FIB , providing a practical route for 

cor relative nanoscale electrical and structural characterization. However, the inherent crosstalk 

between the tip excitation and the cantilever piezoresistive readout remains a key limitation, 

requiring careful selection of the KPFM detection scheme . Heterodyne detection is particularly 

well suited to overcome the crosstalk problem, as it separates the electrical excitation frequency 

from the frequency where the effect of the CPD difference is measured. The crosstalk should 

nevertheless be reduced as much as po ssible on the side of the cantilever design and fabrication ,

such as by introducing a ground plane between the actuation and detection layers, because 

excessive crosstalk even outside the detection bandwidth of the lock -in amplifier can overload 

the amplifiers ’ input range. Performing the KPFM measurement in vacuum conditions has the 

advantage that the higher Q -factor due to the reduced environmental damping can yield a 

higher sensitivity to the weak force gradients in KPFM. On the other hand, if the Q -fact or is 

too high, the resonance peak is too narrow to allow faster and larger bandwidth measurements 

for sideband detection within the same eigenmode. The polymer core in the tri -layer cantilevers 

provides a favourable balance between force sensitivity and internal damping [67,45] . The 

resulting lower quality factor increases the resonance bandwidth, facilitating stable operation 

across both sideband and overtone heterodyne configurations. In this work , we focused on 

measuring the contact potential difference, but heterodyne KPFM is also used for 

characterization of capacitive gradients and carrier concentrations in semiconductor 

devices [68] . For this, detecting the amplitude at the second sideband (𝑓 1 ± 2f𝑒 ) is required, and 

the broader resonance peak of the tri -layer cantilevers in vacuum provides an avenue for such 

developments , in both sideband and overtone configurations in the future. 

Correlative CPD/SEM/EDS analysis can also be combined with photoelectron 

spectroscopy [69] and electron beam induced current analysis [70] for a strong complementarity to perform in -depth studies of semiconductor industries [31] , alloys [71] , and 2D heterostructure 

assemblies. While correlative SEM/KPFM can greatly help in understanding semiconductor 

devices and failure, observing changes in the CPD measurement after electron irradiation can 

cause false interpretation , especially for absolute measurements . When possible, the SEM 

image should be recorded after AFM/KPFM characterization. The mechanism underlying this 

beam -induced modification of surface potential remains unclear. However, the observed 

increase in CPD contrast after electron exposure suggests that controlled irradi ation could 

potentially be used to extract additional information about the sample, representing an 

interesting direction for future work. 

# 5 Conclusion 

Using self -sensing tri -layer cantilevers with a conductive tip enables correlative, in -situ 

AFM/KPFM/SEM. In the tri -layer configuration, t he polymer core sandwiched between SiN 

layers ensures ohmic isolation between the self -sensing elements and the active KPFM 

electrode. The capacitive crosstalk is mitigated using heterodyne KPFM (sidebands or overtone 

configurations) , while single -pass operation enables faster and more accurate imaging in 

vacuum. In -situ KPFM within SEM provides a robust correlative platform for characterizing 

reactive or oxidation -prone materials, 2D heter ostructure assembly , and semiconduct or devices 

fabricated directly inside the SEM. The combined KPFM -SEM -EDS workflow enables direct 

mapping of surface potential, morphology, and elemental composition, allowing correlation of 

electronic and chemical contrasts. This synergy provides deeper insights into depletion regions, 

penetration depths, local charge transport, semiconductor junctions, and interfacial 

phenomena, underscoring the unique power of correlative in -situ KPFM -SEM for nanoscale 

material analysis. Furthermore, c ontrolled SEM e -beam exposure can offset and increase the 

CPD contrast when minimized by low -dose beam showering , albeit by offsetting the real CPD 

values .Acknowledgements 

We sincerely thank the Center of Micronanotechnology at EPFL for their invaluable assistance 

throughout the microfabrication process. This research was funded by the Swiss National 

Science Foundation (SNSF 20020_213072; G. E. F.), European Research Council (ERC -2017 -

CoG, InCell, 773091; G. E. F.), co -funded by the Innosuisse – Swiss Innovation Agency 

(Eurostars E!8213 -Triple -S; Eurostars -Eureka -, E!665, 9953 -CAS -C; NAFTAQ: Novel AFM 

Techniques for Autonomous Quality Control in Industrial Manufacturing, 102. 271 IP -EE, 

10632; G. E. F.), the ETH Domain ORD Program (Open SPM, 10126, Open SPM+, 

ORD200165; G. E. F) and the Technology Agency of the Czech Republic (TACR 

FW10010168; G. E. F.). The authors acknowledge Santhanu P. Ramanandan and Anna 

Fontcuberta I Morral for generously providing the nanowire sample. The authors would like to 

thank Poonam Singh for the critical reading of the manuscript and assistance with figure 

schematics . We also would like to thank Mahdi M. Sarvjahany and Zahra A. Dulabi for 

assistan ce with 3D renderings. 

# Authors ’ Contributions 

P.P.S . conceived the idea, assembled and characterized the instrument al setup , characterized 

the devices , design ed experiments , performed measurements, analyzed data, and wrote the final 

manuscript. N.H. designed and fabricated cantilever devices, prepared samples , and 

characterized the devices . E.S.M. and A .R. provided the 2D hBN heterostructure samples and 

interpreted the data. M.P. designed experiments, assisted with measurements, and analyzed 

data. G.E.F. conceived th e idea, designed the instrument , and supervised the project. All 

authors reviewed and edited the manuscript. 

# Declarations 

# Conflict of Interest 

G.E.F. was the co -founder of GETec Microscopy GmbH, later acquired by Quantum Design. 

G.E.F. no longer holds a stake in either company. G.E.F. and N .H. hold a patent on the 

microfabrication process used for the self -sensing KPFM cantilevers. P.P.S., M.P., E .S.M., and 

A.R. declare no conflict of interest. Fig. 1. In -situ KPFM inside SEM with piezo -resistive cantilever (a) 3D rendering of the 

combined setup, AFM operating inside a dual beam (FIB SEM) chamber with piezo -resistive 

tri -layer polymer cantilever, with schematic illustration of KPFM electronics and setup . An 

example of the cantilever’s (b) mechanical response and (c) amplitude due to electrostatic 

forces obtained inside the SEM vacuum chamber using a tri -layer polymer piezo -resistive 

sensing cantilever . (d) In -situ topography, CPD , and SEM SE image of Ge nanowires on Si 

substrate correlated with energy dispersive X -ray analysis , s cale : 1 μm.Fig. 2. In the piezo -resistive readout method, capacitive crosstalk affects KPFM 

acquisition . (a) 3D rendering of a conductive tri -layer cantilever. The polymer core is 

sandwiched between two silicon nitride films. (b) SEM image of a tri -layer cantilever , scale: 

40 μ m. Optical image of a tri -layer cantilever before the conductive coating is deposited , with 

an illustration of the resistors in a Wheatstone bridge configuration for strain sensing at the 

base of the cantilever beam. (c) Cantilever deflection amplitude and phase, measured by optical 

beam deflection at a 10 nm tip -sample distance, versus electrical excitation frequency at 

different AC amplitudes in air; inset shows response at resonance. (d) Cantilever deflection 

amplitude and phase, measured by piezo -resistive readout at a 10 nm tip -sample distance, 

versus electrical excitation frequency at different AC amplitudes in air , showing the dominance 

of capacitive crosstalk at higher frequencies ; the inset shows the response at resonance .Fig. 3. Choice of the KPFM configuration to be used inside the vacuum chamber of the 

SEM . (a) Schematic of various KPFM configurations (amplitude modulated imaging in dual 

pass ( white ), left single pass heterodyne (H -) sideband detection in 1st eigenmode (green) and 

2nd eigenmode (blue), and single pass heterodyne (H -) overtone detection : topography feedback 

in 2 nd eigenmode and CPD compensation in 1 st eigenmode ( yellow ) and topography feedback 

in 1 st eigenmode and CPD compensation in 2 nd eigenmode (red). (b) H-KPFM image of Au/Al 

sample inside SEM , scale: 4 μ m (Electrostatic amplitude response curve s shown in (c) are 

taken at point 1 (Au) and point 2 (Al) ). The line profile for the CPD values is provided in the 

bottom inset. (c) Electrostatic amplitude response curve for the different H-KPFM 

configurations mentioned in (a) follows the same colour code for the H -KPFM configuration, 

where a lighter shade of the colour resembles point 1 (Au) , and the darker shade resembles 

point 2 (Al) . The voltage values mentioned are the difference in CPD obtained between point 

1 ( Au) and point 2 (Al) at each configuration. Fig. 4. Correlative KPFM -SEM analysis of semiconductor circuits. (a) SEM (secondary 

electrons) image of the semiconductor circuit (at 5 kV and 500 pA) , scale: 5 μ m. (b) CPD 

image of the same area , highlighting areas with different surface potentials within the circuit 

and highlighting the effects of polishing on the circuits , scale: 5 μ m. (c) Topography of the 

polished semiconductor circuit. (d) Overlay of topography with KPFM, showing the 

cleanliness of KPFM analysis and its usefulness in semiconductor failure analysis. (e) Zoom 

insets of the same region in SEM (1), AFM topography (2), and KPFM (3) with arrows 

highlighting regions showing similar electronic properti es validated by SEM and KPFM , scale: 

3 μ m.Fig. 5. Correlative KPFM -SEM analysis of 2D heterostructures deposited on an ITO 

substrate . (a) SEM (secondary electron) image and s chematic with representative stacking 

orientation of flakes of hBN , neutron -irradiated hBN ( VB- hBN ), and PbI 2 forming the 2D 

heterostructure assembly , scale: 10 μ m. (b) SEM (SE), topography, and CPD image of the area 

highlighted in a solid box in (a), showing inhomogeneities , such as delamination (in arrow) in 

flakes in CPD imaging , missed by topography and SE image , scale: 2 μ m. (c) SEM (SE), 

topography, and CPD image of the area highlighted in a dashed box in (a), showing 

inhomogeneities (in arrow s), such as bubbles, and wrinkles in flake stacking, confirmed by 

correlative CPD, topography, and SE imaging , scale: 1 μ m.Fig. 6. E-beam influence on 2D heterostructures . (a) SEM imaging with a tri -layer cantilever 

in view for locating regions of interest amongst hBN flakes and 2D heterostructures , scale: 100 

μm. The inset highlights the region of interest . Topography (b) and CPD imaging (c) of hBN 

flakes on ITO obtained with H -KPFM sideband configuration , s cale: 5 μ m, followed by an 

SEM exposure on the dashed area , image shown in (d) at 2kV and 200 pA , scale: 2 μ m at a 

dosage of  1.9 × 10 −12 𝑚𝐶 /μm 2. The CPD image taken after SEM exposure (e), when 

compared to the CPD image when unexposed, showed that the electron irradiation shifted the 

contact potential in the exposed areas , scale: 5 μ m.References 

1. G. Binnig, C. F. Quate, and Ch. Gerber, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56 , 930 (1986). 

2. M. P. Murrell, M. E. Welland, S. J. O’Shea, T. M. H. Wong, J. R. Barnes, A. W. McKinnon, M. Heyns, 

and S. Verhaverbeke, Applied Physics Letters 62 , 786 (1993). 

3. M. Lanza, U. Celano, and F. Miao, J Electroceram 39 , 94 (2017). 

4. J. Weber, Y. Yuan, S. Pazos, F. Kühnel, C. Metzke, J. Schätz, W. Frammelsberger, G. Benstetter, and 

M. Lanza, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15 , 56365 (2023). 

5. M. Radmacher, R. W. Tillmann, M. Fritz, and H. E. Gaub, Science 257 , 1900 (1992). 

6. S. R. Cohen, Ultramicroscopy 42 –44 , 66 (1992). 

7. R. Garcia and R. Proksch, European Polymer Journal 49 , 1897 (2013). 

8. R. Garcia and J. R. Tejedor, Nanoscale Adv. 7, 6286 (2025). 

9. R. Grover, B. McCarthy, D. Sarid, and I. Guven, Applied Physics Letters 88 , 233501 (2006). 

10. Y. Zhang, W. Zhu, F. Hui, M. Lanza, T. Borca‐Tasciuc, and M. Muñoz Rojo, Adv Funct Materials 30 ,

1900892 (2020). 

11. M. Nonnenmacher, M. P. O’Boyle, and H. K. Wickramasinghe, Applied Physics Letters 58 , 2921 

(1991). 

12. S. V. Kalinin and D. A. Bonnell, Phys. Rev. B 63 , 125411 (2001). 

13. W. Melitz, J. Shen, A. C. Kummel, and S. Lee, Surface Science Reports 66 , 1 (2011). 

14. J. L. Garrett and J. N. Munday, Nanotechnology 27 , 245705 (2016). 

15. L. Collins, A. Belianinov, S. Somnath, N. Balke, S. V. Kalinin, and S. Jesse, Sci Rep 6, 30557 (2016). 

16. T. Glatzel, U. Gysin, and E. Meyer, Microscopy 71 , i165 (2022). 

17. A. Zahmatkeshsaredorahi, R. Millan -Solsona, D. S. Jakob, L. Collins, and X. G. Xu, Nat Rev 

Methods Primers 5, 53 (2025). 

18. P. Xu, P. Wang, M. Wang, F. Sun, J. Leng, Y. Shi, S. Jin, and W. Tian, Nano -Micro Lett. 17 , 285 

(2025). 

19. Y. Martin and H. K. Wickramasinghe, Applied Physics Letters 50 , 1455 (1987). 

20. H. J. Mamin, D. Rugar, J. E. Stern, B. D. Terris, and S. E. Lambert, Applied Physics Letters 53 , 1563 

(1988). 

21. O. Kazakova, R. Puttock, C. Barton, H. Corte -León, M. Jaafar, V. Neu, and A. Asenjo, Journal of 

Applied Physics 125 , 060901 (2019). 

22. Y. Martin, D. W. Abraham, and H. K. Wickramasinghe, Applied Physics Letters 52 , 1103 (1988). 

23. C. C. Williams, W. P. Hough, and S. A. Rishton, Applied Physics Letters 55 , 203 (1989). 

24. E. Ruska, Z. Physik 83 , 492 (1933). 

25. O. O. Maryon, C. M. Efaw, F. W. DelRio, E. Graugnard, M. F. Hurley, and P. H. Davis, JoVE 64102 

(2022). 

26. C. Wang, H. Jin, and Y. Zhao, Small 17 , 2100974 (2021). 

27. C. Sakaguchi, Y. Nara, T. Hashishin, H. Abe, M. Matsuda, S. Tsurekawa, and H. Kubota, Sci Rep 10 ,

17055 (2020). 

28. L. Lechaptois, Y. Prado, and O. Pluchery, Nanoscale 15 , 7510 (2023). 

29. D. Wrana, K. Cieślik, W. Belza, C. Rodenbücher, K. Szot, and F. Krok, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 10 ,

1596 (2019). 

30. P. P. Swain, M. Penedo, and G. E. Fantner, Microscopy and Microanalysis 31 , ozaf110 (2025). 

31. C. H. Schwalb, A. Alipour, K. T. Arat, R. K. Dumas, D. Jangid, Md. A. R. Laskar, S. Chakrabarti, W. K. 

Neils, S. Sen, S. Spagna, and U. Celano, Applied Physics Reviews 12 , 041314 (2025). 

32. Lord Kelvin, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science 

46 , 82 (1898). 

33. U. Zerweck, C. Loppacher, T. Otto, S. Grafström, and L. M. Eng, Phys. Rev. B 71 , 125424 (2005). 

34. M. Fang, Y. Liu, T. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Mai, and G. Xing, Applied Physics Letters 126 , 173504 

(2025). 

35. C. Xiao, C. Wang, W. Ke, B. P. Gorman, J. Ye, C. -S. Jiang, Y. Yan, and M. M. Al -Jassim, ACS Appl. 

Mater. Interfaces 9, 38373 (2017). 36. C. M. Efaw, T. Da Silva, P. H. Davis, L. Li, E. Graugnard, and M. F. Hurley, J. Electrochem. Soc. 166 ,

C3018 (2019). 

37. M. F. Hurley, C. M. Efaw, P. H. Davis, J. R. Croteau, E. Graugnard, and N. Birbilis, CORROSION 71 ,

160 (2015). 

38. T. Uruma, C. Tsunemitsu, K. Terao, K. Nakazawa, N. Satoh, H. Yamamoto, and F. Iwata, AIP 

Advances 9, 115011 (2019). 

39. M. Tortonese, H. Yamada, R. C. Barrett, and C. F. Quate, in TRANSDUCERS ’91: 1991 International 

Conference on Solid -State Sensors and Actuators. Digest of Technical Papers (IEEE, San Francisco, CA, 

USA, 1991), pp. 448 –451. 

40. G. Meyer and N. M. Amer, Applied Physics Letters 53 , 1045 (1988). 

41. T. Gotszalk, P. Grabiec, F. Shi, P. Dumania, P. Hudek, and I. W. Rangelow, Microelectronic 

Engineering 41 –42 , 477 (1998). 

42. D. Yablon, P. Werten, M. Winhold, and C. H. Schwalb, (2017). 

43. A. J. Haemmerli, N. Harjee, M. Koenig, A. G. F. Garcia, D. Goldhaber -Gordon, and B. L. Pruitt, 

Journal of Applied Physics 118 , 034306 (2015). 

44. Y. Sugawara, L. Kou, Z. Ma, T. Kamijo, Y. Naitoh, and Y. Jun Li, Applied Physics Letters 100 ,

223104 (2012). 

45. N. Hosseini, M. Neuenschwander, J. D. Adams, S. H. Andany, O. Peric, M. Winhold, M. C. 

Giordano, V. S. Bhat, M. Penedo, D. Grundler, and G. E. Fantner, Nat Electron 7, 567 (2024). 

46. S. P. Ramanandan, P. Tomić, N. P. Morgan, A. Giunto, A. Rudra, K. Ensslin, T. Ihn, and A. 

Fontcuberta I Morral, Nano Lett. 22 , 4269 (2022). 

47. Nenovision, Microscopy Today 30 , 18 (2022). 

48. E. Mayner, Y. Zhumagulov, C. de Giorgio, F. Chu, P. Swain, G. Fantner, A. Kis, and A. Radenovic, 

(n.d.). 

49. Inc. Quantum Design, Microscopy Today 31 , 22 (2023). 

50. Quantum Design, (2023). 

51. S. H. Andany, G. Hlawacek, S. Hummel, C. Brillard, M. Kangül, and G. E. Fantner, Beilstein J. 

Nanotechnol. 11 , 1272 (2020). 

52. LBNI, EPFL, (2021). 

53. S. Xu and M. F. Arnsdorf, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92 , 10384 (1995). 

54. D. Nečas and P. Klapetek, Open Physics 10 , 181 (2012). 

55. J. Schindelin, I. Arganda -Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T. Pietzsch, S. Preibisch, C. 

Rueden, S. Saalfeld, B. Schmid, J. -Y. Tinevez, D. J. White, V. Hartenstein, K. Eliceiri, P. Tomancak, and 

A. Cardona, Nat Methods 9, 676 (2012). 

56. G. E. Fantner, D. J. Burns, A. M. Belcher, I. W. Rangelow, and K. Youcef -Toumi, Journal of 

Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control 131 , 061104 (2009). 

57. Ch. Sommerhalter, Th. W. Matthes, Th. Glatzel, A. Jäger -Waldau, and M. Ch. Lux -Steiner, Applied 

Physics Letters 75 , 286 (1999). 

58. A. Zahmatkeshsaredorahi, D. S. Jakob, and X. G. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C 128 , 9813 (2024). 

59. H. Xie, H. Zhang, D. Hussain, X. Meng, J. Song, and L. Sun, Langmuir 33 , 2725 (2017). 

60. S. Kitamura and M. Iwatsuki, Applied Physics Letters 72 , 3154 (1998). 

61. B. Moores, F. Hane, L. Eng, and Z. Leonenko, Ultramicroscopy 110 , 708 (2010). 

62. R. Coq Germanicus, M. Chaudhary, E. Vuillermet, and M. Lazar, in (2025), pp. 404 –410. 

63. X. Liu and M. C. Hersam, Advanced Materials 30 , 1801586 (2018). 

64. Z. Peng, X. Chen, Y. Fan, D. J. Srolovitz, and D. Lei, Light Sci Appl 9, 190 (2020). 

65. E. Blundo, A. Surrente, D. Spirito, G. Pettinari, T. Yildirim, C. A. Chavarin, L. Baldassarre, M. Felici, 

and A. Polimeni, Nano Lett. 22 , 1525 (2022). 

66. X. Liu, B. Erbas, A. Conde -Rubio, N. Rivano, Z. Wang, J. Jiang, S. Bienz, N. Kumar, T. Sohier, M. 

Penedo, M. Banerjee, G. Fantner, R. Zenobi, N. Marzari, A. Kis, G. Boero, and J. Brugger, Nat 

Commun 15 , 6934 (2024). 67. J. D. Adams, B. W. Erickson, J. Grossenbacher, J. Brugger, A. Nievergelt, and G. E. Fantner, Nature 

Nanotech 11 , 147 (2016). 

68. Z. Qu, J. Wei, Y. Sugawara, and Y. Li, Surfaces and Interfaces 49 , 104441 (2024). 

69. S. Günther, Progress in Surface Science 70 , 187 (2002). 

70. H. J. Leamy, Journal of Applied Physics 53 , R51 (1982). 

71. C. F. Mallinson, A. Harvey, and J. F. Watts, J. Electrochem. Soc. 164 , C342 (2017). Supplementary information 

Different H-KPFM configurations for a tri -layer polymer piezo -resistive sensing cantilever in 

vacuum 

Effect of the electron beam and the ion beam observed with in -situ KPFM imaging 

# Supplementary figures 

S1 : Process flow and cantilever pictures 

S2: EFM image of nanowires 

S3 : Electrostatic amplitude response curve s evaluation of sidebands 

S4: Onsemi data (additional information )

S5 : Effect of low -dose and high -dose SEM exposure on CPD 

S6 : Persistence of the SEM exposure (air and vacuum) 

S7 : Persistence of SEM exposure even after FIB exposure 

S8 : Effect of FIB exposure on CPD Supporting Information for 

# In -situ correlative SEM/KPFM for semiconductor devices and 

# 2D heterostructures 

Prabhu Prasad Swain 1, Nahid Hosseini 1, Evel ine . S Mayner 2, Aleksandra Radenovic 2, Marcos 

Penedo 1,* and Georg E. Fantner 1,* 

> 1

Laboratory of Bio - and Nano - Instrumentation, Institute of Bioengineering, École 

Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 

> 2

Laboratory of Nanoscale Biology , Institute of Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale 

de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 

*Corresponding author.  E-mail:  georg.fantner@epfl.ch , marcos.penedo@epfl.ch Supplementary Information 

Extended data for Fig. 3 

Different H-KPFM configurations for a tri -layer polymer piezo -resistive sensing 

cantilever in vacuum 

We consider a specific tri -layer SiN -BCB -SiN -Pt piezoresistive cantilever [1] operated in vacuum 

conditions and compared four heterodyne [2,3] Kelvin probe force microscopy configurations: (a) 

sideband detection on the 1st eigen mode (SB1) and the 2nd eigen mode (SB2) , and (b) heterodyne 

configuration with actuation on the 1st eigen mode and detection on the 2nd eigen mode (O2 ) and 

heterodyne configuration with actuation on the 2nd eigen mode and detection on the 1st eigen mode 

(O1) . Let the first -mode frequency, stiffness, and quality factor be  𝑓 1, 𝑘 1, and  𝑄 1 respectively . Likewise, 

the second -mode resonance is  𝑓 2, 𝑘 2 and  𝑄 2. The piezo -resistive displacement -to -voltage transduction 

factors for the 1st eigenmode and the 2nd eigenmode are  Γ1 and  Γ2 respectively . The tri -layer polymer -

core architecture is important because the soft polymer layer reduces the effective bending stiffness 

without losing the deflection sensitivity , while the near -clamp piezo -resistor maintains high strain 

sensitivity [1] .

Composite beam mechanics and modal response . For dynamic operation, each flexural eigenmode 

of the cantilever is approximated as a damped harmonic oscillator. The mechanical transfer function 

of the detected mode  𝑛  is written as 

𝐺 𝑛 (𝑓 ) = 1

𝑘 𝑛 [1 − (𝑓 /𝑓 𝑛 )2 + 𝑖  𝑓 /(𝑓 𝑛 𝑄 𝑛 )]

where  𝑓 𝑛 , 𝑘 𝑛 , and  𝑄 𝑛  are the various eigenmodes (n = 1, 2, …), modal stiffness, and quality factor of 

the detected mode. Physically,  𝐺 𝑛 (𝑓 ) is mechanical susceptibility , which gives the displacement 

generated per unit oscillating force at the eigenmode  𝑓 𝑛 . At resonance, 

∣ 𝐺 𝑛 (𝑓 𝑛 ) ∣= 𝑄 𝑛 

𝑘 𝑛 

For on -resonance mechanical amplification , the  𝑄 /𝑘  scaling suggests that a mode with high  𝑄  and low 

𝑘  strongly amplifies force into displacement . In a sideband measurement, however, the force is not 

detected exactly at  𝑓 𝑛 , but at 

𝑓  = 𝑓 𝑛  ± 𝑓 𝑒 

where  𝑓 𝑒  is the applied electrical excitation frequency . In sideband configurations (SB1 and SB2), it 

acts as the offset from the carrier resonance, whereas in overtone configurations , it is chosen such that 

the heterodyne force frequency  𝑓 ℎ coincides with the other eigenmode. Thus , the sideband loss for any 

eigenmode  𝑓 𝑛  is just the ratio 

𝑅 SB ,𝑛 ≡ ∣ 𝐺 𝑛 (𝑓 𝑛  ± 𝑓 𝑒  ) ∣

∣ 𝐺 𝑛 (𝑓 𝑛 ) ∣

For sideband operation , assuming  𝑓 𝑒 ≪ 𝑓 𝑛 , the signal is detected off resonance at  𝑓 ℎ = 𝑓 𝑛  + 𝑓 𝑒  , the 

resonant gain is reduced by 

𝑅 SB ,𝑛  = [1+(2𝑄 𝑑 𝑓 ℎ/𝑓 𝑛 )2]−1/2

Physically,  𝑅 SB ,𝑑  quantifies the loss for detecting slightly away from the resonance peak. 

Electrostatic mixing [5] . The tip -sample electrostatic energy is 

𝑈  = 1

2 𝐶 (𝑧 )𝑉 2

So, the normal electrostatic force is 𝐹 e(𝑡 ) = 1

2 𝐶 ′(𝑧 )𝑉 (𝑡 )2

where  𝐶 (𝑧 ) is the tip -sample capacitance and  𝐶 ′(𝑧 ) = 𝑑𝐶 /𝑑𝑧  is its gradient. The applied voltage is 

written as 

𝑉 (𝑡 ) = 𝑉 𝐷𝐶  − 𝑉 CPD + 𝑉 AC cos (2𝜋 𝑓 𝑒  𝑡 )

where  𝑉 𝐷𝐶  is the DC tip bias,  𝑉 CPD  is the contact potential difference, and  𝑉 AC  is the amplitude of the 

electrical excitation at frequency  𝑓 𝑒  . The cantilever is assumed to oscillate mechanically with a carrier 

amplitude  𝐴 𝑛  at carrier frequency  𝑓 𝑛 :

𝑧 (𝑡 ) = 𝑧 ˉ + 𝐴 𝑛 cos (2𝜋 𝑓 𝑛 𝑡 ), wh ere  𝑓 𝑛  = 𝑓 1 for SB1 and O2, and  𝑓 𝑛  = 𝑓 2 for SB2 and O1. 

A first -order Taylor expansion of the capacitance gradient about the mean separation  𝑧 ˉ gives 

𝐶 ′(𝑧 ) ≈ 𝐶 ′(𝑧 ˉ) + 𝐶 ′′ (𝑧 ˉ)𝐴 𝑛 cos (2𝜋 𝑓 𝑛 𝑡 )

Substituting into the force law and retaining only the term linear in  𝑉 AC , first order in  𝐴 𝑛 , and located 

at the heterodyne [2]  frequency yields 

𝐹 𝐻 (𝑡 ) = 𝐶 ′′ (𝑧 ˉ)𝐴 𝑛 𝑉 AC (𝑉 𝐷𝐶  − 𝑉 CPD ) cos (2𝜋 𝑓 𝑛 𝑡 ) cos (2𝜋 𝑓 𝑒 𝑡 )

Using product identity gives force components at  𝑓 ℎ = 𝑓 𝑛  ± 𝑓 𝑒  , and decomposing the heterodyne force 

into components at well -defined frequencies, the amplitude of the measured signal at the detection 

frequency  𝑓 ℎ

𝐹 𝐻 (𝑓 ℎ) = 1

2 𝐶 ′′ (𝑧 ˉ)𝐴 𝑛 𝑉 AC (𝑉 DC − 𝑉 CPD )

The force -per -volt conversion factor is then 

𝑀 ℎ ≡∣ ∂𝐹 𝐻 

∂𝑉 CPD 

∣= 1

2 ∣ 𝐶 ′′ (𝑧 ˉ) ∣ 𝐴 𝑛 𝑉 AC 

Physically,  𝑀 ℎ is the heterodyne mixing coefficient , and it tells how much oscillating force is generated 

per volt of CPD for a given carrier oscillation. It depends on the tip electrostatics and carrier amplitude, 

not directly on the piezoresistive stack. 

Piezoresistive readout [6] . The oscillatory displacement of the detected mode is 

𝑥 𝑛 (𝑓 ℎ) = 𝐺 𝑛 (𝑓 ℎ)𝐹 𝐻 (𝑓 ℎ)

and the bridge output is 

𝑉 out = Γ𝑛 𝑥 𝑛  = Γ𝑛 𝐺 𝑛 (𝑓 ℎ)𝐹 𝐻 (𝑓 ℎ)

wh ere  Γ𝑛  is the mode -dependent displacement -to -voltage factor. Physically,  Γ𝑛  converts cantilever 

displacement into measured voltage through piezoresistive strain transduction. As the resistor is close 

to the clamp,  Γ𝑛  depends strongly on modal curvature near the base rather than only on tip displacement. 

The detector -side force sensitivity is therefore 

𝑆 𝐹 ,𝑛  =∣ ∂𝑉 out 

∂𝐹 𝐻 

∣= Γ𝑛  ∣ 𝐺 𝑛 (𝑓 ℎ) ∣

This measures how effectively a force at the detection frequency is converted into voltage. 

The four configurations can therefore be written directly as 

𝑉 SB 1 ∝ Γ1 ∣ 𝐺 1(𝑓 1 ± 𝑓 𝑒  ) ∣ 𝐹 𝐻 

𝑉 O2 ∝ Γ2 ∣ 𝐺 2(𝑓 2) ∣ 𝐹 𝐻 

𝑉 O1 ∝ Γ1 ∣ 𝐺 1(𝑓 1) ∣ 𝐹 𝐻 

𝑉 SB 2 ∝ Γ2 ∣ 𝐺 2(𝑓 2 ± 𝑓 𝑒  ) ∣ 𝐹 𝐻 

Thus, the detector -side force -to -voltage sensitivities are 𝑆 𝐹 (SB 1) = Γ1

𝑄 1

𝑘 1

𝑅 SB ,1

𝑆 𝐹 (O2) = Γ2

𝑄 2

𝑘 2

𝑆 𝐹 (O1) = Γ1

𝑄 1

𝑘 1

𝑆 𝐹 (SB 2) = Γ2

𝑄 2

𝑘 2

𝑅 SB ,2

In general, the choice of H -KPFM configuration for a trilayer piezoresistive cantilever is governed by 

the balance between electrostatic mixing, mechanical amplification, and piezoresistive transduction. 

The electrostatic mixing part is set by the carrier -specific mixing coefficient  𝑀 𝑖 ∝ 𝐶 ′′ 𝐴 𝑖 𝑉 𝐴𝐶 , and is 

therefore influenced by the tip -sample geometry, carrier amplitude, and applied AC bias. The 

mechanical gain part is controlled by the ratio  𝑄 𝑖 /𝑘 𝑖 , so modes with higher quality factor and lower 

stiffness provide stronger force -to -displacement amplification. The piezo -resistive readout part is 

determined by the mode -dependent piezo -resistive transduction factor  Γ𝑖 , which depends on how 

strongly each mode generates strain in the resistor region near the cantilever base. 

O1 benefits from resonant detection on the soft first mode and is therefore generally favoured when 

𝑘 1 ≪ 𝑘 2. O2 becomes competitive when the second mode has sufficiently large  𝑄 2, enhanced 

piezoresistive transduction  Γ2, or a larger carrier -specific mixing coefficient  𝑀 1. Sideband 

configurations (SB1 and SB2) are always hindered because they detect slightly away from resonance, 

through the factor  𝑅 SB , so their performance worsens as the sideband offset increases or as the resonance 

becomes narrower. 

In addition, the lower  𝑄  factors of polymer -core tri -layer cantilevers mak e both sideband and overtone 

H-KPFM configurations practically accessible. Extended data for Fig. 6, S5, S6, S7 and S8 

Effect of the electron beam and the ion beam observed with in -situ KPFM imaging 

The measured CPD in KPFM imaging is not solely a work -function map. It is an effective surface -

potential signal containing contributions from surface chemistry, trapped charge, adsorbates, oxides, 

contamination , and capacitive averaging [7,8] . A general KPFM signal obtained after electron beam 

irradiation is a combination of  𝑉 𝐶𝑃𝐷 , th e intrinsic contrast of the unmodified surface,  𝑉 dipole , aris ing 

from adsorbate or oxide dipoles,  𝑉 charge , coming from trapped charge s, and  𝑉 contam , the contribution 

from beam -induced contamination by surface hydrocarbons .

Effect of the electron beam on the sample surface through induced contamination . Electron 

irradiation dissociates or polymerizes hydrocarbon species adsorbed on the sample or supplied by the 

microscope environment [9,10] . The resulting carbonaceous overlayer can form during routine SEM 

imaging and alter the measured CPD by  𝑉 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑚 . Electron -beam contamination depends on 

accelerating voltage, dose, beam current, dwell time, dose rate, surface diffusion of precursor 

molecules , and chamber cleanliness. 

The contamination layer also affects CPD by changing the effective surface work function, introducing 

molecular dipoles , and increasing the electrical separation between the tip and the underlying sample. 

The sign of  Δ𝑉 dipole  depends on the chemical state and orientation of the adsorbates; therefore, 

hydrocarbon contamination can either increase or decrease the measured CPD. 

Observed changes to C PD contrast shown in Fig. S5 are consi stent with previous SEM contamination 

studies [10] . A smaller exposure dose (similar to beam showering or the resulting exposure when using 

SEM’s larger field of view to locate regions of interest for an AFM scan) allows the surface 

hydrocarbons to clear just outside the perimeter of the scanned area and results in a positive shift in 

CPD contrast. However, when the e lectron beam is confined to a small area, the contaminants from 

outside the perimeter of the scanned area move towards the scanned area . These observations are 

reported to persist even after cleaning of t he sample surface [11] , similar to what we observe in Fig. S6 ,

even after the sample is brought into ambient conditions. These CPD changes can be attributed to the 

induced contamination, resulting from electron -induced conversion of adsorbed hydrocarbons into 

amorphous or graphitic carbonaceous material [9 –11] .

Effect of the electron beam on the sample surface through induced trapped charges.  SEM 

exposure can also inject or trap charge, particularly in oxides, insulating regions, poorly conducting 

layers , or hydrocarbon films [12] . The trapped charge density can produce a DC offset (as in Fig. S5) .

KPFM studies on electron -irradiated nanodevices have shown that SEM/EDX -type exposure can 

generate persistent substrate charging, sufficient to alter local electrostatic and electrical 

measurements [13] .At low doses , both trapped charges , or contamination , or a combination of both, shift the mean CPD 

while the original CPD contrast due to the different materials is still observable . However, t he loss of 

contrast at higher doses perhaps arises from screening and capacitive averaging by the beam -modified 

layer.  It is important to remember that t he magnitude and even sign of the contrast depend on the history 

of irradiation, beam current, and acceleration voltage, demonstrating that electron exposure can 

introduce material -dependent surface -potential shifts rather than a simple uniform offset. 

Effect of the focused ion beam on SEM induced changes and on the fresh sample surface.  FIB 

exposure includes contamination and charging mechanisms similar to what is described for the electron 

beam , but additionally also introduces ion implantation, sputtering, amorphization, vacancy/interstitial 

generation , and redeposition. At low FIB imaging dose, sputtering can be small ; however, changes due 

to ion -induced trapped charge s and near -surface defect formation s can be detected by CPD variations .

At higher do ses , the measured CPD becomes dominated by the implanted, damaged , or redeposited 

surface layer. Localized residual potentials in Ga -FIB -irradiated insulating materials have been 

previously measured by Kelvin probe methods, supporting this interpretation [14] .

Thus, t he measured CPD signal after an ion beam irradiation is a combination of  𝑉 𝐶𝑃𝐷 , th e intrinsic 

contrast of the unmodified surface , 𝑉 charge , aris ing from ion -induced trapped charges , 𝑉 implant ,

contributed from implanted ions (such as  Ga +), 𝑉 defect , the contribution from beam -induced vacancies 

and defects , and  𝑉 contam  coming from ion -beam -induced contamination due to hydrocarbon deposition .

Additional changes to the surface or surface material [15] due to sputtering, redeposition, roughening, 

trenching, or induced erosive changes will also influence CPD .

We used FIB exposure to alter or remove the SEM induced changes to CPD. However, just a mere FIB 

exposure was not enough to remove the CPD changes due to a high -dosage SEM exposure. However, 

a longer exposure to FIB, simulating milling, results in a surfac e erosion that completely alters the CPD 

due to the removal of surface layers rather than contamination (Fig. S 7). For surfaces pre -exposed to 

SEM, subsequent low -dose FIB imaging may produce either no additional CPD shift or a further 

positive DC offset. The absence of a further shift indicates that the SEM -induced surface state is already 

saturated or that ion -induced charging, sputtering, deposition , and charge compensation approximately 

balance. A further elevation indicates that FIB imaging adds residual charge, defect -assisted trapping, 

ion implantation, or additional carbonaceous/dipolar modification to the SEM -conditioned surface. 

Because the FIB dose used for imaging is below the regime of significant milling, these effects are 

primarily electrostat ic and chemical rather than topographic. 

On a fresh surface, FIB induces similar effects to an electron beam at low dosages, and starts to erode 

the sample at higher dosages, thus the effect of CPD starts getting influenced due to material changes 

arising from redeposition or sputtering and differential milling of materials (Fig. S8). Fig. S1. Tri -layer conductive cantilever for KPFM studies inside SEM . (a) Process flow for 

fabrication of the MEMS cantilever . (b) SEM image of a tri -layer conductive cantilever tip . (c) 

Optical image of a tri -layer conductive cantilever bonded for smoo th integration and use with 

AFM. Fig. S2. Electrostatic force microscopy images of Ge nanowires on a Si substrate . (a) 

Sample topography of the nanowires. (b) EFM image highlights buried features (marked with 

arrows) not noticeable on the topographical image , showing the usefulness of EFM imaging 

inside SEM for correlating compositional and material contrast , s cale: 5 μ m.Fig. S3 . Evaluation of the influence of AC voltages and choice of sideband bandwidth on 

the quality of CPD compensation curves in sideband H -KPFM mode under ambient 

conditions for the same cantilever in both optical -beam and piezo -resistive readout . At 

higher AC voltages, the amplitude for the CPD signal is better for both types of deflection 

readout : (a) optical beam and (b) piezo -resistive . However, care should be taken not to 

influence the surface with a high electric field strength around the tip. The CPD is compensated 

better when using optical readout (c) in ambient conditions in sideband mode, as the influence 

of mechanical oscillations on the self -sensing readout (d) is larger . The choice of bandwidth is 

critical to avoid the effect of topography in CPD in sideband mode. Fig. S4 . Correlative SEM KPFM and topography analysis of IGS CMOS sensor . SEM SE 

image of the IGS CMOS sensor at (a) 5 kV 500 pA and (b) 2 kV 200 pA, scale: 5 μ m.

Topography ( c) and CPD ( d) of the ar ea in the dashed box in (a) and (b) acquired in H -KPFM 

single -pass mode inside SEM, scale: 1 μ m. (e) 3D topography representation and the overlay 

of KPFM with topography of the area marked in dashed lines in (d) with features (marked with 

arrows). The contrast of these features in the SEM image comes due to the composit ion and 

not due to topography, scale: 500 n m.Fig. S5 . Influence of e lectron beam on CPD measurements . (a) CPD of an unexposed 

surface of the Au/Al sample (i), SEM image at exposure of 1.5 kV and 40 pA with a dose of 

1.9 × 10 −12 𝑚𝐶 /μm 2 and a total exposure time of 1.3 ms, scale: 4 μm (ii), followed by CPD 

of the exposed surface (iii). Line profiles compare the CPD contrast before (in black) and after 

(in red) the low -dosage SEM exposure . (b) CPD of an unexposed surface of Au/Al sample (i), 

SEM image at exposure of 5 kV and 0.5 nA with a dose of  4.1 × 10 −6 𝑚𝐶 /μm 2 and a total 

exposure time of 120 s, scale: 600 nm (ii), followed by CPD of the exposed surface (iii). Line 

profiles compare the CPD contrast before (in black) and after (in red) the high -dosage SEM 

exposu re , s cale for all AFM images: 5 μ m. 

At low dosage of SEM, the CPD offset at the interface shows sharper detection ; however, the 

absolute CPD measurement is influenced. This can be a contribution from injected charges or 

the cleaning of contaminants via diffusion. At higher dosage of SEM, the exposed area loses 

all its contrast, suggesting a carbonaceous layer screenin g the actual material. The spreading 

of contaminants from nearby areas to the exposed area also influences their CPD. Fig. S 6. Persistence of the influence of the electron beam on CPD measurements . (a ) H -

KPFM image after various SEM exposure s: low , medium, and high dosage . ( b) H -KPFM of 

the same area , 8 hours after SEM exposure , taken in vacuum conditions . ( c) H -KPFM of the 

same area taken in ambient conditions , after venting out the SEM chamber. ( d) H -KPFM of 

the same area after pumping back into vacuum conditions . The area in each image shows a 

shift due to thermal drift , due to changes from vacuum to ambient and back to vacuum 

conditions , s cale for all AFM images : 5 μm. 

This suggests that the effect on CPD due to SEM exposure seems to persist for longer periods 

of time, extending to ambient conditions, similar to observations on EDX effect on Be alloy. 

Thus, correlative SEM KPFM should be reported with the history of the electron beam 

radiation on the sample. Fig. S 7. Effect of FIB and electron beam on CPD measurements . (a) H-KPFM scan of a

fresh , unexposed to SEM area of the Au/Al sample . (b) H -KPFM after SEM exposure of a 2

μm x 2 μm area at a dosage of  1.2 × 10 −6 𝑚𝐶 /μm 2for a total of 2 min scan ned at 5 kV and 

40pA. (c) FIB scan to image at 30 kV and 1 pA . (d) H - KPFM after the F IB imaging . (e) FIB 

scan to image at 30kV 1pA over a larger region encompassing the smaller area exposed to SEM 

and FIB, which results in milling after 10 repeated scans . (f) H-KPFM after 10 repeated FIB 

scan s, similar to (e) , s cale for all AFM images : 5 μm. 

At low dosage of FIB, alongside charge injection ( like SEM), ion implantation, sputtering 

effects, redeposition , and defect formation influence the local CPD. At higher dosage, the FIB 

mills the area selectively based on the atomic number, thus the changes in CPD can be due to 

removal of actual material as well as effects similar to low dosage. Fig. S 8. Influence of only the FIB on CPD measurements. (a) CPD of an unexposed surface 

of the Au/Al sample (i), FIB image at exposure of 30 kV and 1 pA (ii), followed by CPD of 

the exposed surface (iii). Line profiles compare the CPD contrast before (in black) and after 

(in red) the FIB exposure . The line scan also shows that milling -induced effects due to FIB 

exposure affect the lighter element (Al) more than the heavier element (Au), as expected , s cale 

for AFM images: 5 μm. 

The FIB at a relatively low dosage also shows an offset in CPD contrast, especially at the edges. 

This help s us enhance the contrast at the junction of materials, albeit at the expense of losing 

real CPD values. 1. N. Hosseini, M. Neuenschwander, J. D. Adams, S. H. Andany, O. Peric, M. Winhold, M. 

C. Giordano, V. S. Bhat, M. Penedo, D. Grundler, and G. E. Fantner, Nat Electron 7, 567 

(2024). 

2. J. L. Garrett and J. N. Munday, Nanotechnology 27 , 245705 (2016). 

3. Y. Sugawara, L. Kou, Z. Ma, T. Kamijo, Y. Naitoh, and Y. Jun Li, Applied Physics Letters 

100 , 223104 (2012). 

4. J. R. Lozano, D. Kiracofe, J. Melcher, R. Garcia, and A. Raman, Nanotechnology 21 ,

465502 (2010). 

5. S. Hudlet, M. Saint Jean, C. Guthmann, and J. Berger, Eur. Phys. J. B 2, 5 (1998). 

6. S. -J. Park, J. C. Doll, and B. L. Pruitt, J. Microelectromech. Syst. 19 , 137 (2010). 

7. T. Glatzel, U. Gysin, and E. Meyer, Microscopy 71 , i165 (2022). 

8. W. Melitz, J. Shen, A. C. Kummel, and S. Lee, Surface Science Reports 66 , 1 (2011). 

9. S. Hettler, M. Dries, P. Hermann, M. Obermair, D. Gerthsen, and M. Malac, Micron 96 , 38 

(2017). 

10. M. Hugenschmidt, K. Adrion, A. Marx, E. Müller, and D. Gerthsen, Microscopy and 

Microanalysis 29 , 219 (2023). 

11. C. F. Mallinson and J. F. Watts, J. Electrochem. Soc. 163 , C420 (2016). 

12. M. A. Stevens -Kalceff, MRS Proc. 738 , G5.4 (2002). 

13. M. Kovařík, D. Citterberg, E. Paiva De Araújo, T. Šikola, and M. Kolíbal, ACS Appl. 

Electron. Mater. 6, 8776 (2024). 

14. M. A. Stevens -Kalceff, S. Rubanov, and P. R. Munroe, MRS Online Proceedings Library 

792 , 74 (2003). 

15. C. A. Volkert and A. M. Minor, MRS Bull. 32 , 389 (2007).