Title: Toward Multi-kW Power Delivery Methodologies for Advanced 3D Heterogeneous Integration

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.24904v1

Published Time: Tue, 22 Sep 2026 03:11:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Toward Multi-kW Power Delivery Methodologies for Advanced 3D Heterogeneous Integration 

Peiyi Yue, Hangyu Zhang, Ratul Das, Ramesh Harjani, and Sachin S. Sapatnekar 

Abstract —The demands of modern applications require the construction of ever more complex integrated systems, with AI applications in particular serving as a significant driver for increased system size, potentially going beyond the trillion-transistor mark. The path to building these systems requires the use of advanced packaging, with heterogeneous integrated 2D and 3D chiplets placed atop a substrate. Such computationally powerful systems require significant power for computation: reliable and robust power delivery is a major challenge in light of high power densities and pin count bottlenecks. This paper overviews approaches to building design methodologies that overcome this problem, through the design of multistage distributed power delivery systems, optimized for performance and reliability, and built to coexist within stringent performance, thermal, and reliability constraints. 

Keywords: Power delivery, 3D integrated circuits, 2.5D, advanced packaging, heterogeneous integration, voltage regu-lators. I. I NTRODUCTION 

The push towards greater integration is driven by the increas-ing demands of high-performance computation, artificial intel-ligence, and big-data applications that require large amounts of data movement. For cloud applications, conventional mono-lithic computing systems with limited die sizes cannot service the performance needs of modern AI applications: for instance, it takes 20 NVIDIA H100 GPUs to hold one copy of the GPT4 model parameters [1], and data movement costs are very high. The slowdown in Moore’s law leaves a gap in satisfying the exponentially-growing hardware needs of advanced chips. For edge applications, bandwidth limitations from sensor/memory to compute modules pose fundamental challenges in the big data era: a 2-bit DVS camera with 4M pixels, uses a 1TBps data rate at 1 MHz [2]; graph neural nets on the Nell dataset with 64K graph nodes require up to 2.7 TB of data to be communicated between processing elements [3]; large language models demand over TBps-level data rates [4]. These drivers have led to tremendous interest in hetero-geneous integration (HI) [5], a form of 3D integration that places multiple chiplets, each of which may be built using a planar 2D or 3D technology, on a substrate and connects them with dense, fine-pitch interconnects on organic, glass, or silicon interposer substrates. HI provides a viable approach for increasing integration levels at low cost and high yield. New HI interconnect technologies [6]–[8] with through-silicon vias (TSVs)/through-glass vias (TGVs), microbumps, hybrid 

> The authors are with the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. This effort is supported in part by the NSF under awards 2212345, 2324945, 2403408, and 2437795, and by the SRC JUMP2.0 CHIMES Center.

bonding, Cu-Cu bonding, and Cu pillars, have provided path-ways for meeting the demands of modern and future data- and compute-intensive workloads. HI brings tremendous compute capability within a package, while also incorporating low-latency access to memory and limiting the costs of data movement [9]–[15]. Moreover, HI raises new opportunities for integrating 2D or 3D chiplets on a 2.5D substrate built in different technology nodes, or using disparate technologies, allowing each function to be implemented in a technology that best matches its perfor-mance, cost, and reliability requirements. For instance, cutting-edge digital systems typically use advanced technology nodes for lower power, while analog/mixed-signal (AMS) and radio-frequency (RF) components often remain in mature technology nodes (e.g., 65nm or 180nm) for improved voltage tolerance, better device matching, and lower cost. RF front ends may also leverage SiGe BiCMOS or GaAs-based processes to provide strong performance for specific use cases such as RF/mm-wave circuits and power amplifiers. In addition, HI facilitates the integration of high bandwidth memories (HBMs) and silicon photonic interconnects, overcoming the limitations of traditional electrical links. A representative HI system may integrate sensing (image sensors, phased arrays, and RF antennas), analog front-end processing, a digital baseband that provides the horsepower for on-chip sensing, low-latency sig-nal processing, as well as on-chip and off-chip communication. However, the task of performing a large amount of com-puting within a small footprint also brings together new challenges. One of the chief issues is the problem of ensuring that sufficient power is supplied to the integrated system to support this additional computation. It is projected that the power required by a 3D HI system will be considerably larger than that for today’s most advanced chips, but will have to be supplied by a comparable number of pins. Projections show that such systems will require multiple kiloWatts of power within the small footprint; as a point of comparison, a domestic refrigerator today consumes about half a kiloWatt, over a considerably larger footprint. To deliver power to multi-kW HI systems with low losses, a strong focus must be placed on developing robust power delivery solutions that assure power integrity. The severity of the problem goes well beyond the already-difficult problem of power delivery for 2D chips: predictions show that HI systems can experience sustained power densities of 1–10 W/mm 2 [5], as opposed to power densities in the range of 0.1–0.5 W/mm 2 for traditional 2D systems. Beyond ensuring correct chip operation, this problem is critical from a global standpoint: as chip power consumption increases, it takes up arXiv:2609.24904v1 [cs.AR] 21 Sep 2026 2

a growing percentage of global energy consumption. In 2024, datacenter power was reported to be at 4.4% of US energy consumption, a number that is projected to grow to up to 12% by 2028 [16]. Achieving efficiencies that approach or exceed 90% for these high-power integrated systems is therefore an imperative piece of the solution to controlling global energy consumption. In this paper, we consider the problem of power delivery to a 3D HI system, considering the design of multiple stages of voltage regulators as well as the power distribution network (PDN) that delivers power to individual chiplets. Specifically, we address issues related to the design of these networks and new design automation tools and methodologies required to ensure robust power delivery in a 3D HI system. The magnitude of this problem is unprecedented in integrated system design: today’s state-of-the-art die require about 700 W of power at about 1 W/mm 2; in contrast, future HI systems are projected to require multiple kW of power [17] at densities running up to 1–10 W/mm 2. The path to systematically solving these problems is still being mapped out, and this is a nascent field: there has been relatively little work on systematically examining the design space and enumerating the possible solutions. As a first step, in [18], approaches for delivering 1–50kW of power to systems, using direct 48V-to-1V, 48V-to-24V-to-1V, and 48V-to-12V-to-1V, have been explored. Today’s cutting-edge high-power systems may use a couple of GPUs in a package, where the scope of the power delivery problem can be limited due to the uniformity of the structure. Future systems will be much more heterogeneous, as they are disaggregated into a diverse set of chiplets that share the same substrate [19]. To the best of our knowledge, no general solutions to this general problem have been proposed for the general problem of disaggregating large systems, which constitute the input to the power delivery problem. The aim of this paper is to draw from techniques that have been used on related design problems, such as on-chip power delivery, to outline the design space for 3D HI power delivery, and therefore to lay the ground for future work in this area. A recent complementary survey on this topic [20] addresses design and technology solutions to this problem; this paper focuses on modeling, analysis, and optimization solutions for design automation for vertical power delivery in HI systems. The decisions that drive power delivery design must be made in conjunction with other parts of the HI design process. Building a large HI system requires (1) methods for chiplet disaggregation that map the system to smaller 2D or 3D chiplets, working in conjunction with system-technology co-optimization (STCO) to determine reasonable design decisions that optimize computation and communication, together with the choice of substrate and chiplet technologies; (2) procedures for multiphysics [21] and multiscale analyses that incorporate thermomechanical aspects into performance analysis, ranging from fast machine-learning-driven analyses in early stages to signoff-quality multiphysics-based analysis; (3) physical de-sign techniques for placing and routing chiplets and embedded active/passive elements on and within the substrate, including the design of thermal and power delivery solutions; and (4) the underlying infrastructure required to facilitate 3D HI design, including the design of chiplet libraries and the establishment of data formats and standards. All of these are intertwined with decisions associated with power delivery design. It is important to point out that a conventional approach could model the chiplet as the point of load (PoL) for power delivery, but chiplets may, or may not, have their own internal regulation mechanisms. In fact, the actual PoL is at the switching elements, but this would require the solution of very large systems, neglecting the natural partition between the HI substrate and the chiplet. We will discuss ways of bridging this gap by considering chiplet regulation capabilities while building the power delivery solution in the HI substrate. Some of the chief considerations that arise in the design of power delivery solutions for 3D HI systems are as follows: 

Generality of the methodology to multiple 3D HI technolo-gies. Power delivery methodologies must be general enough to address the common problems of all HI systems, and yet specific enough to be applicable within the constraints of specific technologies. For instance, the HI substrate may support the introduction of only interconnects, or interconnects and passive devices, or interconnects and passive as well as active devices. In the first case, the substrate supports merely the PDN and any regulators must be embedded within chiplets; in the second, it also supports decoupling capacitors and inductors that could be used by a regulator chiplet; and in the third, distributed regulators can be placed throughout the substrate. This has a significant impact on the achievable efficiency and effectiveness: the cardinal rule of power delivery is that the closer the voltage regulator can be to the point of load, the more effective it can be. 

Design of the high-level architecture for power delivery. 

The power delivery solution requires the development of a high-level architecture for power delivery, followed by detailed design. A typical architecture includes a first-stage regulator that takes a high-voltage off-chip voltage supply and converts it to an intermediate bus voltage (IBV) for distribution to second-stage voltage regulator modules. Depending on the HI technology, these modules may be distributed within the HI package to achieve optimal efficiency and to maintain effective voltage regulation in the presence of PDN losses. 

Integration with other 3D HI system optimizations. The design of the 3D HI chip goes through multiple stages, from early-stage to late-stage design. In early design, the system is disaggregated into multiple chiplets, e.g., by selecting chiplets from a library [19]. These disaggregated chiplets must go through a placement stage. In various early- and late-stage design steps, due to the high power densities, a power de-livery solution must be codesigned at an appropriate level of granularity to serve the needs of the system. This requires fast analysis and optimization techniques for early-stage system design, integrated into the disaggregation or placement opti-mization, and more deliberate optimization as more detailed design information is available in late-stage system design. For example, during disaggregation, it is necessary to determine whether to choose a chiplet with on-chip regulators; or one with front-side power delivery, or both front-side and back-side connections; or to use a set of separate regulator chiplets. 

Support for self-consistent iterative refinement from early-3

Fig. 1: Power delivery architecture for a 3D HI system. 

stage to late-stage design. The power delivery solution typically undergoes multiple rounds of refinement as the design is developed. During early-stage design, key design decisions about the architecture of the solution must be made, depending on the degrees of freedom provided by the HI substrate and the limited information available at that stage. These high-level decisions constrain and guide the subsequent implementation of the entire power delivery solution. For example, early decisions on the power delivery architecture must be made using coarse, and sometimes no, knowledge of chiplet disaggregation or placement; these must be refined in a self-consistent manner throughout the design flow, ensuring that the detailed physical implementation remains compatible with earlier decisions. 

Interactions with multiphysics and reliability issues. Com-ponents of the power delivery solution are embedded within the 3D HI stack, and like chiplets and the interconnects, face thermal and mechanical stresses that may alter perfor-mance [22]. Elevated temperatures also exacerbate reliability risks and failures in devices and interconnects, which must be factored into the design of regulators and PDN interconnects. The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the overall architecture of an HI power delivery solution, followed by a discussion of design considerations, constraints, and goals in Section III. Next, Sections IV and V discuss approaches for analyzing and optimizing these systems, discussing past work and pointing the way towards open problems and early solutions. Finally, future research directions are covered in Section VI, followed by concluding remarks in Section VII. II. P OWER DELIVERY ARCHITECTURE 

The stringent constraints on power delivery in HI systems ne-cessitate the development of a design architecture that operates at the printed circuit board (PCB) level, the HI substrate level, and the chiplet level. The overall architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1, and an example of such a system is shown in Fig. 2 [23]. At the PCB level, off-package Stage 1 step-down power converters are used to convert high-voltage low-current power to high-current power at an IBV suitable for distribution across the package. This is then fed the package through a PDN to Stage 2 voltage regulator modules (VRMs) that convert the IBV to CMOS-compatible voltage levels, such as 0.8 V. These regulators are placed close to the load (e.g., within the interposer) so that the high-current low-voltage path is short, and they are connected to the chiplets using a PDN in the HI substrate, delivering current to the PoL at this voltage level. Within the chiplet, on-chip voltage regulators, such as fully integrated voltage regulators (FIVRs) [24], and low-dropout regulators (LDOs) are well-established solutions. Approaches for advanced power delivery that have been proposed in the literature [14], [25]–[28] form a good basis for building a power delivery methodology. Historically, processor power delivery in data centers has relied on multi-stage conversion. A typical chain has been 400 V-to-48 V, 48 V-to-12 V, and 12 V-to-∼1 V, with 12 V serving as the distribution bus [29]–[31]. More recently, 48 V or 54 V DC has become the distribution voltage [32]–[41], and two architectural options are commonly used: (i) two-stage conversion with a local intermediate bus voltage, or (ii) direct single-stage conversion from 48 V to core-level voltages. In two-stage solutions, a front end implemented with an inductive LLC, DC transformer, switched-capacitor, or hybrid switched-capacitor provides a fixed conversion ratio, followed by a regulated point-of-load multi-phase buck converter [42]– [50]. Placing the buck stage close to the processor cores improves the speed of the transient response, which is critical for bursty workloads such as those for AI acceleration, with the ability to step rapidly between near-zero and full load. The achievable current-slew rate is ultimately limited by inductor dynamics; multi-phase buck converters can approach this limit by driving selected switches on/off to apply positive or negative voltage across the inductors for a full switching period and quickly ramp currents to their target values [51]– [53]. In contrast, direct single-stage conversion from 48 V-to-core voltage has been demonstrated using isolated converters as well as switched-capacitor-based hybrid topologies [54]– [59]. Hybrid switched-capacitor converters with multiple in-ductors are constrained by flying-capacitor voltage balance and typically cannot sustain full on/off operation for fast current changes [57], [60]. Transformer-based isolated [61] or non-isolated converters [62] often rely on frequency and/or phase-shift modulation, which generally responds more slowly than duty-cycle control and can further limit transient performance. As a result, future data centers will likely favor two-stage architectures, with a vertically delivered point-of-load second stage placed close to the compute die. Recent demonstrations of direct conversion from the distribution bus to a local in-termediate bus—bypassing the 48 V board-level bus—further reinforce this trend and push the first stage toward higher conversion ratios [63]–[67]. For a two-stage scheme, having chosen the input voltage level, the next degree of freedom lies in selecting the IBV. For a 48 V / 54 V board-level input, the IBV has traditionally been chosen to be 12 V, but recent work has explored the use of lower values. For example, [23] uses a value of 1.8 V, as shown in Fig. 2; [68] uses 1.83 V; [69] uses 6 V; and [70] uses 6.75 V. Lower voltages significantly improve the efficiency of Stage 2 regulators and reduce their size. The trade-off is that a lower IBV raises the bus current for a given power, which increases the bus I 2R distribution loss and reduces the Stage 1 conversion efficiency. With an appropriate 4

Fig. 2: Vertical power delivery schemes [23] with magnetics embedded at (a) the substrate and (b) the die level. IBV, however, an overall increase in system efficiency is achievable [69]. An exposition of the need for this optimization for the “last inch” problem of power delivery, responsible for a significant fraction of losses, with first-order analyses and intuition, is presented in [67]. With the advent of 2.5D and 3.5D integration, this last inch problem is being transformed to a “last millimeter” problem, as regulation solutions move from the motherboard into the package. Additional gains in efficiency are achievable through the appropriate placement of the VRMs. Traditionally, the VRMs were placed on the board, in the same plane as the HI package and adjacent to it. This choice results in substantial routing parasitics in the supply/ground lines to the package. More recently, designs have shifted toward vertical power delivery, placing the VRMs directly beneath the package to reduce these parasitics. Two options are possible: the inductors are embedded in the PCB substrate (Fig. 2(a)), or within the die or the HI package (Fig. 2(b)). Vertically stacked regulators have also been proposed for Stage 1 VRMs [71]–[73]. At the chiplet level, voltage regulation can be implemented using switched-capacitor voltage regulators (SCVRs) [74], [75] or LDOs [76]–[78]. Under heavy loading and fast load transients, the large load current develops a supply droop across the finite regulator output impedance and the PDN impedance, and the I 2R loss in the PDN grows quadratically with that current. In particular, the I 2R loss in the PDN increases rapidly as voltage droop worsens [72]. Moreover, the feasible converter topology is strongly influenced by the HI substrate and its ability to integrate passives. In principle, an HI substrate may employ capacitive or inductive converters. In a silicon interposer, where it is difficult to build sufficiently high-Q inductors, SCVRs can be used instead of inductive regulators to convert an input IBV to the output level(s) required by the chiplet. Other types of substrates (organic or glass) can more readily support embedded magnetics and thicker conductors with lower losses, facilitating high-power inductive conversion, particularly for large-area designs. It is well known that the use of distributed smaller voltage regula-tors, placed close to the load, provides significant advantages over a single large regulator [76], [79]. Selecting converters over the space of design choices, and optimally placing them to meet power integrity constraints, is a pressing issue that must be addressed in HI systems, and calls for codesign of the converters with the PDN for maximum effectiveness of the power delivery solution. Methods for automatic PDN construction, such as [80], may be useful when adapted to the HI context, and can be coupled with algorithms for decoupling capacitor placement within the HI substrate [81], [82]. The problem of optimizing the power distribution system involves a determination of how the losses are partitioned among various components–the Stage 1 and Stage 2 convert-ers, and the PDNs. This optimum depends on the sensitivity of each component: if the cost function, which may include the resource utilization (e.g., area) of the components is more prohibitive for one component than the other, the losses may be unevenly split. Generally speaking, Stage 1 converters, which operate at higher voltages, have better efficiency than Stage 2 converters, and it would be expected that the losses in the Stage 2 converters, which supply a low rail voltage at high current, may dominate those in Stage 1. Limitations on the ability to use high-Q inductors could further result in larger losses. In other words, the loss allocation problem is an integral part of system optimization. III. C ONSIDERATIONS FOR POWER DELIVERY 

The ability of integrated circuits to meet their functional and performance specifications is contingent on providing robust and stable power supply levels. For example, a digital circuit is merely a practical implementation of an abstraction that models binary logic with two distinct voltages, typically the supply voltage, Vdd , and the ground potential of zero, and the gates in a circuit act as switches that steer either the Vdd 

or ground signal to the output, depending on the logic level. The ability to supply reliable Vdd and ground levels not only dictates the correctness of computations, but also determines circuit speed [83]. AMS/RF blocks also rely on well-regulated supply rails and a low-impedance ground reference to meet specifications on accuracy, linearity, and noise. The requirements for power delivery involve the ability to deliver high-quality supply and ground voltage levels to the computing elements with high efficiency (i.e., low conversion and distribution losses), while ensuring reliability over the lifetime of the system, under resource constraints [83]. Non-idealities in the power delivery path, including finite resistance, inductance, and capacitance in the lines carrying supply and ground signals, introduce voltage deviations that can shift circuit performance and timing [84]. Today’s chiplets operate at supply voltages in the range of 0.6–0.8 V, potentially going down to 0.5 V in the future, and have very little headroom for noise. A typical noise allowance is 10% of Vdd , of which about 2–3% is allocated for DC noise due to currents drawn during steady-state operation. As power management strategies have grown more aggressive and multicore and multichiplet systems involve an increasing number of subsystems that may switch in and out of the power delivery system, the dominant part of the margin has been reserved to provision for transient noise. Moreover, it may often be the case that different chiplets may operate at different supply voltage levels, or that some 5

chiplets (e.g., analog parts) require separate and clean voltage supplies free of the noise injected by digital switching, or that chiplets may require support for dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS) whereby the supply voltage is varied according to the performance, thermal, and power constraints on the system [85]. In such a case, there is a need to support multiple power domains. This can be achieved through separate PDNs for each power domain driven by independent regulators, with DVFS being implemented by altering the regulator output according to the needs of the power domain. Specific considerations in the design of the power delivery system are listed below: 

Resource limitations at various levels – in connections from the package to the substrate; in wiring within the HI substrate and the chips, from the substrate to the chiplet, and within a 3D-stacked chiplet – imply that access to the computational elements must traverse multiple bottlenecks. Furthermore, these pins and interconnect resources must be shared with other signals, such as clock networks, chiplet-to-chiplet interconnects, and within-chip routing; with MIM and MOM capacitors; and with test infrastructure. This is a substantial change over the already-constrained scenario that requires resource shar-ing in conventional 2D chips [86], and implies the need for in-package and on-chiplet voltage regulation. Such an approach must leverage within-package and within-substrate passives, and novel power delivery schemes, as well as coordinated mechanisms for resource sharing for limited pin and interconnect resources. 

Conversion efficiency losses within multiple stages of volt-age regulator modules can result in the dissipation of power before it reaches the computational elements. Not only is this wasteful, but it results in the generation of heat flux that must be removed from the system to maintain reasonable operating temperatures. 

Parasitic losses result in degradations in voltage levels, and are caused by the RLC parasitics associated within the entire power delivery stack, including package pins, re-distribution layers, package wires, wiring and vias in the HI substrate, microbumps, hybrid bonds, and wires/vias within chiplets. For example, as the current through a wire increases, its IR losses increase, or when the dI/dt through a package pin is high, the L dI/dt associated with the pin inductance can cause voltage levels to degrade. Therefore, these losses vary during the operation of the system and are dependent on system activity. 

Reliability failures are caused by aging effects induced by high currents and voltages in the system. These include electromigration in wires, vias, and bumps, which is particularly acute in the power delivery network whose wires typically carry unidirectional currents over many years, resulting in the migration of metal over an extended period of time, as well as device failures due to phenom-ena such as bias temperature instability (BTI), hot carrier injection (HCI), and time-dependent dielectric breakdown (TDDB) of gate oxides, all of which are associated with some combination of high currents, high voltages, and high switching rates. The power delivery solution must be built to last over the entire lifetime of the system in the presence of these stressing factors. In the remainder of this paper, we will outline the first steps towards solving these problems and outline existing approaches that can be used as a stepping stone to building point solutions and design methodologies for power delivery. IV. M ODELING AND ANALYSIS 

In this section, we address the issue of modeling and analysis of various parts of the power delivery solution. In Sec-tion IV-A, we describe techniques for modeling voltage regu-lators. Next, we discuss techniques for analyzing the PDN: this treatment is general enough that these techniques can be used for the networks between Stage 1 and Stage 2, between Stage 2 and the chiplets, and on individual chiplets, followed by an overview of how worst-case excitations can be determined. Finally, we discuss thermal and reliability considerations in Sections IV-D and IV-E, respectively. As stated earlier, most of these solutions have not been explicitly explored in the 3D HI context, but methods from power delivery at the PCB level or the on-chip level may be adapted to this problem. The aim of our discussions in Sections IV and V is to enumerate the space of possible solutions for circuit modeling, analysis, and optimization. 

A. Modeling and design considerations for Stage 1 

Power converters are modeled analytically to estimate the performance around nominal operating points and possible transients prior to hardware design. Efficient power delivery, steady-state, and transient regulation are the primary driving factors for design. Area and volume constraints for a target efficiency also play a significant role. A general steady-state model for a power converter is shown in Fig. 3. This type of modeling is utilized to estimate and optimize losses around the nominal operating points of the converter [87]–[89]. In this model, for a converter with an input-output relationship of Vout = M V in , the losses are modeled as a lumped output resistance, Rout , and a lossless DC transformer with conversion ratio, 1 : M (the lossless DC transformer is used only for modeling purposes). In general, the losses of a converter depend on the operat-ing frequency and the resistance of the current conduction paths. Operating-frequency-dependent losses are incurred by charging and discharging parasitic capacitors, hard-charging power transfer capacitors, and hysteresis and eddy current flow in magnetic cores [90]. On the other hand, any resistance in the converter, i.e., switch on-resistance, copper trace or wire resistance and equivalent series resistance (ESR) in the capacitors and inductors, are responsible for conduction losses. These resistances also incur frequency-dependent AC conduc-tion losses. For Stage 1, where most of the magnetic elements, inductors and transformers are implemented in PCB integrated magnetic devices, frequency-dependent conduction losses can be significant due to skin and proximity effects. The design choice for the switches, capacitors, and magnetic elements is estimated and optimized so that within the given constraints 61: M Rout Vout RLVin 

Fig. 3: General steady-state modeling with losses lumped into an output resistance, Rout .i1(t) v2(t) v1(t) Sw 1 Sw 2    

> 𝜱 𝜱
> i2(t)
> (a) Complementary switches D D D : D I1+ i 1I2+ i 2V1dD D dI2V1+ v 1V3+ v 3
> (b) Small-signal model

Fig. 4: Complementary switches and their small-signal model in traditional PWM converter, i.e., buck, boost, buck-boost, ´Cuk, SEPIC, flyback, etc. of area or volume, the lumped resistance is minimized or efficiency is maximized. Switching power converters transition into different states depending on their switch positions and can be modeled as piecewise linear elements within one transitional state. How-ever, a switching power converter is a nonlinear system and a linear time-invariant analytical model is used for its analysis. A widely-used method is state space analysis (SSA) [91], in which the state equations of the system are perturbed, and linearized to determine the small-signal model. An alternative approach to SSA is averaged switch mod-eling (ASM). In this method, complementary switches in a power converter are identified and their voltage and current waveforms are analyzed [87], [92]. The waveforms are directly averaged and then perturbed and linearized to determine the DC operating points and AC response. Finally, complementary switches are replaced with small-signal perturbation sources from linearization, a transformer with AC and DC transfer capability. In Fig. 4(a), two complementary switches with voltage and current stresses that vary over time are shown. After averaging, perturbation, and linearization, their small-signal analytical model is determined as in Fig. 4(b). Note that SSA and ASM are low-frequency approximations of sampled-data modeling [93], [94]. However, they remain relevant to date due to their simplicity. Both result in the same small-signal models: SSA is more equation-focused, while ASM is circuit-oriented. Both methods generate models with DC operating points and small signal AC characteristics. The SSA method, which is widely used by practitioners, is solved by averaging the state equations of a power converter. Even for known power converter topologies, the state equations must be solved again to obtain the small signal equivalent circuit. In contrast, ASM involves averaging the voltage and current waveforms only for the switches in the converter. Overall, ASM is computationally superior to SSA while providing same results; moreover, it can be easily extended to new and unknown converter topologies by inspection, unlike SSA which lacks this advantage for quick and reliable design. Parasitic resistances and capacitances can also be included in the small-signal model in Fig. 4(b), and their effects can be analyzed for both the AC response and the DC performance. Including parasitic capacitances and/or resistances (i.e., ESR of the output capacitor) may result in a higher order system or new converter dynamics, which will have effects for practical engineering considerations. The extra-element theorem can be applied to get the new small signal models directly from the already-derived ideal small signal models [95]. Including par-asitics can change the DC operating points of the converters. The simplification of small-signal models from ASM, ignoring the DC components, results in a model similar to Fig. 3. Applications of ASM can be extended to complex Stage 1 converters, such as the widely-used multilevel series capacitor buck converter (SCBC) [55], [96], [97]. The schematic of a two-level SCBC (2LSCBC) is presented in Fig. 5(a). The small-signal model of this converter is shown in Fig. 5(b), derived from the ASM method [98]. The small-signal models of multilevel SCBC converters coincide with conventional multiphase buck converters [53], [98]. Other types of con-verters used in Stage 1 [56], [99], can also be modeled with ASM or SSA. To analyze the transient performance of the full system, the small-signal models are assembled as shown in Fig. 6, which shows the block diagram of a pulse width modulated (PWM) control for a converter. The ASM techniques and results can also be modified for different modes of operation and for other types of control [92], [100], [101]. The overall performance of the converter for steady-state regulation and transient recovery time, overshoot, and undershoot can be estimated using the averaged circuit model and the control block diagram. Most recently explored Stage 1 power delivery topologies are based on switched-capacitor (SC) hybrid converters [42]– [50]. However, several SC-based hybrid configurations exhibit voltage imbalance in the power-transfer flying capacitors. Prior work has investigated the origins of these imbalance mechanisms and identified key contributing factors [102]– [106]. It has also been shown that coupled inductors can introduce a natural balancing effect on the flying capacitors [107]. At the same time, the existence of balanced converter topologies that do not rely on magnetic coupling indicates that capacitor voltage balance is governed by more fundamental circuit prop-erties, independent of coupled inductors. Despite this, coupled inductors have become a prevalent design element in PWM-operated hybrid converters. Although modeling methods for coupled inductors have been developed [108], their broader impact on hybrid converter dynamics and performance remains insufficiently understood and warrants deeper investigation. In addition, high-current applications typically employ multiple converters connected in input-parallel/output-parallel configurations to distribute the load [51]. Various current-7BC1Vin L1L2Cout A S1B S3S3S4Vout Vx1 Vx2 RLA D1B D2Duty Duty A      

> (a) 2LSCBC i2D1 : D 1V2vout D2D2d1Vout +Cout I1+ i 1I3+ i 3C1L1I2+I4+ i 4I4d2L2RLVout D2 : D 2Vout D1Vout D1++V1d1D1D1d1I3D1D1D2D2d2vin V1+ v 1Vin + v in V2+ v 2V4+ v 4 V3+ v 3(b) Small-signal model of 2LSCBC

Fig. 5: (a) Schematic of a two-level series capacitor buck converter (2LSCBC) and (b) its small-signal model. Vref Compensator Small Signal Model of Converter Feedback Network 

> DVout Vin Iload

Fig. 6: Block diagram of Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) control method for a DC-DC converter. sharing strategies, including droop control, have been proposed to ensure uniform load distribution [109]. However, these methods fundamentally depend on accurate current sensing; without it, effective load sharing cannot be achieved [110]. This highlights the need for improved lossless current sensing techniques that can operate reliably in systems with very high load currents. 

B. Electrical analysis of PDNs 

The PDN is typically modeled as an RLC system that drives time-varying current sources at the loads. The wires in the 

Vdd grid can be modeled as a linear RLC network that is connected through pads to multiple Vdd sources, and to switching elements in the circuit that draw current through the power grid; the ground grid is analyzed analogously. The simulation of this network requires the solution of the following system of differential equations, which may be formulated using Modified Nodal Analysis (MNA) [111]: 

Gx(t) + Cx′(t) = b(t), (1) where G is a conductance matrix, C is the admittance matrix resulting from capacitive and inductive elements, x(t) is the time-varying vector of voltages at the nodes, and currents through inductors and voltage sources, and b(t) is the vector of independent and potentially time-varying excitations. Under the restriction of rectilinear routing, the number of neighbors of each node is seen to be limited by a small constant, typically corresponding to nearest-neighbor nodes along the x, y, and 

z axes, and therefore a system with n nodes has O(n) circuit elements. As a result, the number of nonzeros in the G and 

C matrices are O(n), i.e., both matrices are very sparse. This system of differential equations is efficiently solved in the time domain by reducing it to a linear algebraic system, 

(G + C/h )x(t) = b(t) + C/h x(t − h), (2) using the Backward Euler (BE) technique with a small fixed time step, h. Even for 2D chiplets, the size of this problem is very large, resulting in the formulation of a system of billions of equations in an equal number of variables. When x

consists only of node voltages, as in the case of a network with only resistors, capacitors, and current sources, the coefficient matrix can be shown to be symmetric and positive definite. A symmetric positive definite formulation is feasible even when inductive elements defined by inductance matrices and inde-pendent voltage sources are included in the analysis, although this would involve an additional reduction step from the modified nodal formulation to the nodal formulation, wherein the variables for inductor currents and voltage source currents are eliminated. On the other hand, the use of a K matrix (inverse inductance matrix) [112] formulation directly leads to a symmetric positive definite matrix. The positive definiteness property can be exploited by using efficient techniques such as Cholesky factorization (a direct method) or the conjugate gradient method (an iterative method), and the efficiency can be further improved by taking advantage of sparsity. While such dynamical systems are often solved using vari-able time steps, in the context of power grid solution, keeping 

h constant keeps the left-hand side matrix unchanged over time, so that the cost of Cholesky factorization of this matrix is amortized by its reuse in backward/forward substitution over a large number of time steps [113]. Several classes of techniques have been proposed to manage the cost of solving such large systems. First, the natural sparsity of the system, described above, makes the solution cost only slightly superlinear, and well below the O(n3)

cost of solving a general system of n linear equations. However, a major bottleneck is often not the computation, but the memory overhead associated with solving such large systems: decomposition and reduction techniques can be very effective in limiting this issue. Since integrated systems are 8global nodes global grid ports nodes ports nodes ports nodes internal internal internal local grid k local partitions 

> (a)
> (b)

Fig. 7: (a) The natural hierarchy in the PDN, where local block grids connect to a global grid, has been used to efficiently analyze 2D chips by macromodeling local grids in [114]. (b) Structure of a HI stack that shows SCVRs on an active interposer, connected to chiplets through eight layers of metal: while optimizing regulator locations, similar principles as [114] are used to macromodel the metal stack in [115]. typically built hierarchically, constructing building blocks with their own local power grids that are then hooked up to a higher-level global power grid that connects multiple blocks, as illustrated in Fig. 7. One class of methods, exemplified by the approach in [114], exploits this hierarchy by using sparsified Schur complements for the power grids at lower levels of this hierarchy, and successively solving smaller, and yet sparse, systems. In [115], a similar approach is employed to macromodel intermediate layers of the PDN during aregulator placement optimization, eliminating these nodes by creating the corresponding Schur complement. A second class of methods uses multigrid techniques [116]–[118], including GPU implementations [119], [120] that abstract away internal nodes, effectively introducing a hierarchy, to reduce the size of the system. Successive solutions of the multigrid V-cycle [121] provide a computationally efficient and accurate solution. Other classes of methods solve these problems differently, without Cholesky factorization. The efforts in [123], [124] use model order reduction techniques for the hierarchical analysis of PDNs. Most recently, various machine learning methods have been proposed to accelerate the analysis of PDNs using encoder-decoder networks [122], [125], [126], as illustrated in Fig. 8, and extended to using graph neural networks [127]. 

C. Determining worst-case excitations 

An open problem over many decades has been that of deter-mining the worst-case current patterns that result in the largest voltage drop, or the worst thermal profile. Particularly for mod-ern AI workloads that exhibit highly dynamic, microsecond- or submicrosecond-level dI/dt transients, it is important to model Power map  Temperature map         

> Skip connections
> 2D convolution Max pool Concatenate 2D convolution transpose + upsample
> 2D_conv1
> 2D_conv2
> 2D_conv3 2D_conv_trans3
> 2D_conv_trans2
> 2D_conv_trans1
> Encoder/ downsampling path Decoder/ upsampling path
> (a)

PowerNet  predicted 

RMSE = 5.63e -2 mV 

IREDGe  predicted 

RMSE = 2.40e -2 mV 

(a)  (b)  (c) 

> (b)

PowerNet  predicted 

RMSE = 5.63e -2 m 

IREDGe  predicted 

RMSE = 2.40e -2 mV 

(a)  (b)  (c) Voltage (mV)  (c) 

Fig. 8: Machine learning approaches for fast PDN analysis using U-Net. The topology of a U-Net is shown in (a), and the comparison of the ML prediction and exact analysis are shown in (b) and (c), respectively [122]. and extract these high-frequency transient noises across the package-to-chip PDN interfaces in order to provide realistic excitations applied to the system. This is a difficult problem. First, there may be no single worst-case excitation, as different excitations result in worst-case behavior in different parts of the chip. Second, the worst case typically is a time-varying excitation rather than a static DC draw, complicating the problem by adding both a spatial and a temporal dimension. For the on-chip case, this has been addressed using the so-called vectorless and vectored approaches. A vectorless method attempts to identify a worst-case, often DC, current excitation that is an envelope on the average switching activity of a block. Due to its approximations, it is often pessimistic and unable to account for time-varying effects, but it is appropriate in the early stages of design. A vectored approach, on the other hand, is based on actual traces of input stimuli based on specific operating modes of the system. Every excitation in such an approach is a real stimulus, but it depends on the ability to extract these stimuli, and the search may not be exhaustive enough to uncover the genuine worst case. Practically, a mix of vectorless and vectored methods is used for 2D chip design, and it is anticipated that a similar approach will be used for 3D HI systems. 

D. Thermal considerations 

Thermal management and power delivery are two sides of the same coin [128]: the power delivery scheme transmits energy into the system so that it can be dissipated during computation, but the resulting heat must be removed from the system lest it should excessively raise on-chip temperature levels. Today, circuits are typically limited to a peak temperature of 125C, 105C, or 85C for automotive/military, high-end 9

consumer, and standard commercial applications, respectively. The increased level of power generation will make it challeng-ing to stay within this envelope, and there is a significant body of work on developing thermal solutions for 3D HI systems. In the context of power delivery, it should be noted that a vast majority of the heat in 3D HI systems will be generated by the compute units. This heat flux in itself will create thermal hot spots that affect power delivery circuits. In addition, even at 90% efficiency, delivering 2kW of power will result in losses of over 200 W. Especially in Stage 2 converters, this dissipated power create localized hot spots within small regions, resulting in elevated temperatures that may affect the performance of power delivery circuitry. From the point of view of designing elements of the power delivery solution, elevated temperatures not only cause performance degradation (e.g., by altering the carrier mobility in transistors), but can also result in accelerated aging [129]. This calls for thermal analysis techniques that can be used to identify hot-spots and support electrothermal and reliability analysis, and using them in conjunction with physical design and real-time scheduling to limit the thermal exposure of regulators and interconnects. An example thermal map is shown in Fig. 9. Note that regulators and interconnects can be heated due to (a) the heat that they produce themselves, within transistors in regulators and due to self-heating in interconnects, and (b) more importantly, the heat that is produced by neighboring blocks whose voltage is regulated by these elements. This issue is particularly acute because the circuit blocks with the highest power densities have high current draws, and therefore are likely to be hotter. However, they also require regulators to be placed close to them to supply their high current demands, making them susceptible to thermal- and reliability-induced degradations. ML-based approaches that have shown promise for thermal analysis at the full-chip level can be extended to HI systems. For example, in [125], the thermal problem is viewed as translating an image of an input power map, with knowledge of the heat removal paths, to an output thermal map using a U-Net-based approach. In HI systems, the thermal solution may be more complex, e.g., involving cold plates or active microchannel-based cooling within the HI stack. Such fast models can be used to drive electrothermal analysis, as has been demonstrated at the chip level for a power amplifier structure [130]. Thermal optimization involves the use of a mix of passive and active cooling strategies. Passive cooling involves the use of thermal vias [131], while active cooling may involve cold plates [132], [133] near the package, or microchannels within the package [134]–[136]. 

E. Electrothermomechanical reliability 

Most device reliability mechanisms are impacted by higher temperatures [137], particularly BTI and HCI, which degrade the threshold voltage and drive current of a transistor over time. Hence, reliability must be a first-class objective during HI system design, using cooling solutions to mitigate relia-bility hot spots. Electromigration (EM) is also significantly accelerated by temperature, and therefore it is essential to LDOs LDOs, capacitive DC-DC 

> LDOs
> LDOs LDOs, capacitive DC-DC
> Inductive DC-DC Inductive DC-DC Inductive DC-DC Inductive DC-DC Stacked layer 2 (Active interposer) Stacked layer 1 (Chiplets)
> (a)

Fig. 9: Thermal contours of a 3D HI solution, illustrating how thermal contours can impact power delivery units, from on-chiplet regulators to VRMs in the HI stack. build thermally-aware solutions that account for EM both in wires [138]–[144] that distribute power and signals, and in bumps [145], [146] that connect the chiplets, substrate, package, and PCB. Mechanical reliability also plays a very strong role in HI systems in several ways. First, substrate warping due to mis-matches in the coefficients of thermal expansion (CTEs) can cause a large and thin substrate to warp. Today’s techniques capture these effects using first-order models or detailed numerical simulations, but it will be essential to develop methods that present tradeoffs between the simplicity of the former and the accuracy of the latter, possibly driven by ML models. Second, issues related to CTE mismatches between bumps/bonding pads and the chiplets, or TSVs and silicon, are known to cause circuit performance drifts [147]: with the increasing integration of sensitive AMS/RF blocks, such analyses will become important. Third, stress migration [148] due to residual stress in the chip structure can exacerbate the impact of EM, and must be factored in during EM analyses. V. O PTIMIZATION 

In this section, we list several techniques that may be used to optimize the power delivery system. In Section V-A, we discuss the considerations for power delivery during the chiplet selection step of disaggregation, followed by considerations for optimal IBV selection in Section V-B. Next, in Sections V-C and V-D, we overview techniques for optimizing the regulators and the PDN, respectively. Due to the need for close proximity between the regulators and the PoL to reduce the impact of parastics, we discuss the optimal placement of voltage regulators in Section V-E. Decoupling capacitors can be a vital tool in the quest to reduce transient noise, and HI offers new opportunities in the form of embedded passive capacitor elements: we will address these issues in Section V-F. Finally, we present an unconventional approach for power delivery, using a multistory scheme, in Section V-G. 

A. Chiplet selection and cooptimization 

As an HI system is assembled using a set of chiplets placed on a substrate, various elements go into building a cost 10 

function for optimization. In addition to optimizing yield and cost, reusability can be maximized and carbon footprint reduced [19], [149], [150] by disaggregating the system into a set of chiplets drawn from a library of predesigned chiplets. Elements in this library could be very diverse – e.g., built using different technology nodes, or using 2D or 3D assembly – and could have very different power networks within the chiplet. For example, some chiplets may have only PDNs without on-chip regulation; some also have LDOs; others may have on-chip FIVRs; yet others may be 3D-integrated with back-side interconnect for power delivery [151]–[153] and TSVs across 3D tiers. The disaggregation step that selects chiplets from the library must therefore be conscious of these capabilities and incorporate them in the cost function. Once the chiplets are selected, the power delivery solution on the HI substrate should account for these on-chiplet regulation capabilities during optimization. 

B. Efficiency optimization and IBV selection 

The current load in an HI system can change over time, leading to regulator inefficiency as the regulators may be operating far from its peak efficiency points. This issues has been addressed in [154], which considers the impact of dynamic power management for distributed vertical power delivery by dynamically turning some VRs on or off to ensure that the power delivery solution operates at high efficiency. A second knob for efficiency optimization, as indicated in Section II, is the IBV, which sits at the center of the power delivery tradeoff as it couples the bus I 2R loss to the losses of the first and second stage converters. This dependency carries over into the PDN, where the voltage seen by each chiplet is shaped by where the second stage converters are placed and by how the current spreads through the network. The picture is complicated further by DVFS, under which the supply voltage, the load current, and the switching activity all change from one operating state to the next. Moreover, an IBV that is efficient at one operating point can become inefficient, or even infeasible, at another. A number of designs have chosen particular values, weighing 12 V against lower options in board-level systems, adopting 6 V and 12 V in data center platforms [69], and using 1.8 V in vertical implementations [23]. These efforts confirm that the IBV strongly determines the efficiency, yet each stops short in one respect: some fix the IBV by rule of thumb rather than by formal optimization, others evaluate it at a single operating point and overlook the effect of DVFS, and still others treat the power stages in isolation and miss the coupling between them. A method that considers the impact of fast ns or sub-ns power management, which requires faster capacitive voltage converters, has been proposed in [155]. Scaling such methods to high power levels and fast response times remains an open problem. 

C. Regulator selection and optimization 

At each stage, the regulator topology and its design point are a key degree of freedom, set by the input voltage, the substrate technology, and the power demand of each chiplet. The first stage inductive regulator bridges the high voltage gap (e.g., 48 V/54 V to IBV). Given this high input voltage, it is typically implemented in a high-voltage technology such as gallium nitride (GaN) or bipolar-CMOS-DMOS (BCD), using the modeling techniques outlined in Section IV-A. When the IBV is sufficiently low, the second-stage converter can be built using standard CMOS technologies. While inductive converters are commonly used at the board level in HI systems, inductive conversion can often be avoided in silicon-interposer designs for the downstream distribution of bus voltages to the chiplets, and integrated voltage regulators, in particular high-efficiency SCVRs [74], [75], are attractive for their small size, design flexibility, and high efficiency. To serve the multiple output levels a chiplet may require, a reconfigurable SCVR switches among several topologies, each realizing a discrete conversion ratio, and obtains the intermediate voltages by regulating its output impedance [156]. Prior work has investigated modeling and optimization techniques for individual regulators – SCVRs [156]–[159], LDOs [76]–[78], and FIVRs [24]: due to space limitations, these are not described here. Moreover, the physical location of the regulator is itself a part of this selection: an inductive second stage is typically realized directly below the HI stack as in Fig. 2, whereas a switched-capacitor second stage can be embedded within the interposer [14], a choice that follows from the regulator technology and the passives available in the substrate. Each of these regulators has been optimized as a standalone block. What HI lacks is a methodology that selects and designs them jointly with the IBV, the substrate passives, and the heterogeneous chiplet demands, so that the regulators are optimized as part of the whole power delivery system rather than in isolation. 

D. PDN optimization 

In the on-chip context, the problem of PDN optimization has been extensively studied, and these methods are applicable to optimizing the PDN topology of 3D HI systems. These methods generally use approaches such as topology selection and wire widening [123], [160]–[162] in order to reduce the effective resistance of the grid. The need for fast design-space exploration motivates the use of machine learning methods for this problem. In [80], an automated machine-learning-based approach for developing a PDN topology using predefined template structures was proposed. An example of a PDN built using a set of templates is shown in Fig. 10(a): the layout area is tessellated into regions such that each region can use one of the available templates. Each template spans from the top to the bottom metal layer, and the template pitches are chosen so that the templates can be freely abutted to maintain connectivity of the overall PDN. In an early design stage, with coarse estimates of current, congestion, blockages, and pin locations, an initial grid is synthesized. As the design is better defined at a later stage, and fine-grained distributions of current and congestion become available, the PDN template choices are incrementally refined. At each stage, a trained classifier, based on a convolutional neural network (CNN), selects the optimal template. In late-stage design, an additional 11 C4 bump   

> R1
> R2
> R3
> R4
> R1
> R2
> R3
> R4
> R1 R2
> R3
> R4
> (a)
> (b) (c)

Fig. 10: (a) A template-based PDN with piecewise-uniform pitches, and the resulting IR drop maps after (b) early-stage and (c) late-stage design. input biases the classifier toward an option with an option that is close to the early-stage choice. The IR drop maps at the end of early-stage and late-stage optimization, computed under a static current load, are shown in Figs. 10(b) and (c), respectively, and can be seen to be self-consistent. In principle, this methodology can be extended to the design of PDNs within the HI substrate, matched with on-chiplet PDNs to deliver reliable supply levels. Extending this methodology to PDNs within the HI substrate, matched to the on-chiplet PDNs, additionally requires transient-aware optimization and co-design with regulator and decoupling-capacitor placement, since the static-IR-drop formulation alone does not capture the dynamic and cross-layer effects that dominate HI power integrity. 

E. Regulator placement 

In HI systems, almost every performance parameter is tightly coupled to physical design. Decisions that are made during layout impact the spatiotemporal distribution of power dissi-pation in the system, and hence the power delivery solution and the thermal map of the system, which in turn affects the performance and reliability of elements of the power delivery solution, such as regulators and PDN interconnects. Therefore, placement considerations must incorporate the topology of the power delivery solution. This can be achieved by developing PDNs methodologies as part of physical planning; by using distributed regulators, often more efficient than centralized regulators; by interleaving the placement of regulators, decaps, and inductive elements within the array of chiplets, or within the substrate when possible, to integrate chiplet placement        

> (a) (b)
> Interposer Size (mm) Chiplet Load (A) Power Density (W/mm 2)
> It
> SCVR,ideal
> t∈ { 1,2}
> (A) Min. Voltage
> Vc
> spec
> (V) 30 ×30 (Active area 634 mm 2)50 ∼300 Total: 1000 0.8 ∼2.5 Type0: 310 Type1: 100 0.95
> (c)

Fig. 11: Voltage regulator placement for a testcase with heterogeneous chiplets: (a) SCVR placement locations after optimization and power density map for the chiplet. (b) Volt-age map after placement. (c) Chiplet/SCVR characteristics. with the optimization of the power delivery solution; and by managing the sharing of interconnect resources between PDNs and signal/clock nets. Some of these issues have been addressed at the chip(let) level in the past. In the on-chip context, prior work has shown that the use of distributed structures, which reduce the distance from the regulator to the load relative to a single centralized regulator, are more effective in maintaining power levels at high effi-ciency [79], [163]–[165]. In the HI context, there has been much less work in this area. The task of placing SCVRs must incorporate the objective of reducing losses in the PDN within the interposer. A large load on an SCVR draws a high output current, which produces a quadratic increase in DC power loss across the power delivery network [72], leading to significant efficiency losses, as well as large voltage drops at the pins of the chiplets. However, placing too many SCVRs can result in large overheads. In [115], based on macromodeling and a 0–1 mixed integer linear programming formulation, an approach is presented for finding the optimal number and locations of a set of SCVRs drawn from a library of multiple SCVR types. This work primarily addresses DC loads and is appropriate for early-stage planning, but solutions for late-stage design and transient loads are as yet unexplored. An example solution from this approach is shown in Fig. 11 for a heterogeneous testcase with chiplet current densities ranging from 0.8 to 2.5 A/mm 2. Two types of SCVRs are available, and the method finds the optimal position of the SCVRs that meets the voltage drop specification. The optimized locations of the SCVRs, and the corresponding voltage map, are shown in the figure. Several open problems remain, e.g., (a) regulator place-ment under transient loads; (b) simultaneous optimization of the PDN topology, decap insertion, and regulator placement; (c) regulator placement that is conscious of the regulation ca-pabilities on individual chiplets; (d) thermally aware placement that keeps regulators away from the hot spots; (e) ML-assisted strategies for solving all of these problems. 12 

F. Decoupling capacitance insertion 

Several techniques are available to increase the reliability of power grids and control power grid noise, such as wire widening, grid topology optimization, and insertion of the decoupling capacitor (decap). Of all these techniques, the decaps are arguably the most powerful method for reducing transient noise. Decaps serve as local charge reservoirs and can be used to satisfy sudden surges in current demand by the functional blocks/cells, while keeping supply voltage levels relatively stable. Active/passive damping methods for resonant noise using decaps have also been proposed [166], [167]. Conventional decaps, implemented as SiO 2-based MOS capacitor structures, are widely used in robust power delivery network design. 3D power grid optimization has been studied in [168], [169]. Unlike the 2D case, new considerations come into play while optimizing a 3D power grid using CMOS decaps, specifically related to congestion and leakage issues. The work in [170] presents an approach for decap allocation in 3D power grids, using both conventional CMOS decaps and metal-insulator-metal (MIM) capacitors, which are fabricated between metal layers and have high capacitance density and low leakage current density. However, their use incurs the cost of routing blockages for signal or clock nets that attempt to cross them, and of the resistance of the via stack required to connect the current-drawing blocks in the device layer to the MIM capacitor. In [170], the decap budgeting problem, using both CMOS and MIM decaps, is formulated as a Linear Programming (LP) problem, and an efficient congestion-aware algorithm is proposed to optimize the power supply noise. HI substrates offer further options for embedded passives. The use of deep trench capacitors provides even greater capacitance density, and arrays of such capacitors can be built into the HI substrate [171] and used as decaps. Decap placement in the HI substrate shares many characteristics of the on-chip decap placement problem, including the need for embedded decaps to be placed in proximity to high-powered chiplets, and the need to manage the routing blockages caused by decaps with the needs of clock and signal routes within the HI substrate. Similarly, chiplet technologies that allow for on-chip embedded DRAM also use deep trench capacitors that are available for use as decaps. A recent approach shows the application of reinforcement learning for decap placement in an HI substrate [172]. Since a decap effectively supplies charge to feed a transient current demand, it is most effective when it is close to the current-drawing element. In [82], [173], it is shown that a decap has a region of effectiveness: this is loosely referred to as a radius but the shape of the region is typically not circular and depends on the topology of the power grid. In advanced CMOS technology nodes, wires in lower metal layers have grown very narrow due to scaling, resulting in high per-unit-length resistances. As a result, the region of effectiveness of an on-chiplet decap has shrunk, especially for fast current transients where the access path impedance limits charge delivery from distant decaps. For decaps embedded in the HI substrate, the region of effectiveness is also bounded by the impedance through the substrate, chiplet interface, via 

Fig. 12: Conventional and multistory power delivery schemes. stack, and on-die power grid. However, transitions in the HI substrate typically have lower frequency than those within a chiplet, and therefore they can be effective. 

G. Multistory power delivery in a 3D chiplet 

In the context of 3D chiplets, the multistory power delivery (MSPD) scheme [174], [175], illustrated in Fig. 12, offers a potential route to efficient on-chip power delivery by stacking circuit blocks across a higher supply and recycling their current, which lowers the supply current, the power pin count, and the supply noise under a limited pin budget. A schematic of a conventional supply network is shown in Fig. 12(a), where all circuits draw current from a single power source. Fig. 12(b) shows the multistory supply network, with subcircuits oper-ating between two supply stories. The concept of a “story” is merely an abstraction to illustrate the nature of the power delivery scheme, as opposed to the 3D IC architecture, where circuits are physically stacked in tiers. In this scheme, current consumed in the 2V dd –V dd story is subsequently recycled in the V dd –Gnd story. Due to this internal recycling, half as much current is drawn compared to the conventional scheme, with almost the same total power consumption. A reduced current is beneficial since it cuts down the supply noise. Thus, in the best case, if the currents in the two subcircuits are completely balanced, the middle supply path will sink zero current. This results in minimal noise on that rail. It has been demonstrated in [176] that the idea becomes particularly attractive for 3D IC structures involving stacked processors and memories. The main issue with this technique is the requirement for separate body islands. This may be difficult in typical bulk processes. However, if we consider 3D ICs, the tiers are inherently separated electrically, which makes MSPD partic-ularly attractive. An important consideration in the design of an MSPD circuit is to locally maintain the current balance between logic blocks operating in different Vdd domains. If balance is not maintained, the imbalance current cannot be recycled directly into the next story, and must instead either flow through the regulator on the middle supply path, or travel a long distance through significant parasitics to reach the next story, incurring significant power losses in either case. In an HI system with heterogeneous chiplets and dynamic AI workloads that step between near-zero and full load, maintaining this balance across stories is especially difficult, and any residual imbalance must be absorbed by the regulator on the middle 13 

supply path at the cost of efficiency. Another important issue that has to be considered is the design stage at which the circuit should be partitioned into different Vdd domains. Note that a level shifter is required at the output of a logic block if it is used to drive another logic block operating in a different 

Vdd domain. Level-shifters occupy silicon area and cause extra delays in the circuit. The MSPD idea can be automated by solving an optimiza-tion problem [177], which formulates the two-story problem as one of module assignment between the two stories. The module assignment problem is addressed at the floorplanning level, where the module count is modest and block areas are abstracted out. Experimental results demonstrate that the method is effective in building partitions for multistory power grids in both 2D and 3D structures, where blocks from multi-ple stories may coexist on the same tier or be on different tiers. While not yet a mainstream approach, MSPD is a possible solution to the pin limitation problem in 3D HI systems. However, in the 3D HI context, it is also important to recognize that the power delivery circuitry in the 3D stack is subject to high temperatures. Disturbances in supply levels due to thermal effects at intermediate rails of one story can cause ripple effects in other stories of the stack. Sensitive blocks such as memory or analog circuitry are particularly susceptible to such disturbances, and these effects must therefore be accounted for when MSPD is contemplated. VI. O UTLOOK AND RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 

As stated in Section I, HI systems face tremendous challenges due to stringent requirements on delivering high power at high efficiency, across a large geometric scale but using microscopic components. These systems require voltage regulation efficien-cies that approach or exceed 90%; the higher, the better. This requires holistic optimizations that allocate losses across all stages in Fig. 1. A natural question is whether a high aggregate efficiency is achievable at all for these multi-kW systems, and which mech-anisms ultimately place limits on achieving this goal. Today, Stage 1 can be built with efficiencies of 97% or higher [23], [69], [178], [179]: assuming 98% efficiency, this implies that the remainder of the system must operate at 91.8% efficiency, so that the product of the two equals the desired 90% goal. High overall efficiency involves making each component of the architecture as efficient as possible, and optimizing parameters that impact all components. Component-level losses fall into two categories:  

> •

Losses in the distribution network : These are resistive in nature, and when expressed as a fraction of the delivered power, they amount to the supply droop expressed as a fraction of the rail voltage. As long as the supply rail can delivery voltages to the load with low IR drops ( ∼2% of 

Vdd [80]), the fractional distribution loss remains small.  

> •

Losses in the conversion stages : These are harder to contain, and the limiting factor is in Stage 2 conversion to sub-1 V supply levels, where the conduction loss increases quadratically with the load current. Moreover, the switching losses in the gate drivers, together with the bottom-plate and charge-sharing losses, impose a floor that becomes more severe as the conversion ratio grows. An approach to loss allocation for one-stage structures, or for a fixed set of IBV values, has been proposed in [18], and represents an excellent starting point for tackling this issue. Therefore, the critical bottlenecks lie in ensuring sufficiently low IR drop, which is a requirement for correct circuit operation, and in controlling losses in the Stage 2. The first is likely to be achievable, leveraging intensive prior work on power delivery optimization at the chip and board levels. This is likely to require more efforts in investigating the use of distributed converters that not only meet IR drop requirements, but also ensure sufficiently fast response times to the bursty transients seen by modern workloads stemming from, for example, AI applications. For the latter, it will be essential to use SCVRs in Stage 2. Today’s SCVR efficiencies approach close to 90% [28], [180]–[182], placing the goal of 90% system efficiency within reach, and yet requiring the solution of several challenges. The solution space encompasses silicon-based solutions, but is also enriched by allowing the use of non-silicon devices, which can be integrated into an HI substrate. Table I summarizes the set of challenges and open problems required to meet the goals of HI power delivery, as articulated in this paper, together with a set of suggested research di-rections for overcoming them. In the near term (1–2 years), the first step is to move from individual block optimization to considering optimizations that holistically optimize the system. Optimization of the IBV is a strong lever as it can link losses in various stages and can maximize overall efficiency. Second, topology optimization within the HI substrate is a powerful knob for ensuring efficiency, and encompasses both PDN synthesis for the HI substrate and voltage regulator placement: early solutions in each area make these topics promising targets for near-term solutions. In the medium term (2–5 years), research that combines all elements of analysis to fully incorporate coupled performance, thermal, and reliability considerations will ensure system ro-bustness in real environments. Further, as new HI technologies are inducted into the mainstream, they will provide new methods for building decaps, notably through the use of DTCs. Research techniques must address methods for optimal decap placement, together with regulator placement, in the HI sub-strate, as well as the use of DTCs as flying capacitors within voltage regulators. In addition, as chiplet libraries become more mainstream, the problem of disaggregation to a library must consider chiplet characterization for power delivery as well as chiplet selection methods that incorporate on-chiplet voltage regulation as a design knob. In the long term (5–10 years), research must develop better methods for modeling worst-case power patterns, address the combination of techniques for increasingly integrated opti-mization of the power delivery system, incorporating static as well as transient analysis considerations. It will also be necessary to explore unconventional methods for breaking through the barrier of limited pin counts, e.g., through the use of MSPD techniques, to meet the requirement to deliver high power within a limited footprint, and therefore a limited 14 

TABLE I: List of open problems and critical research directions 

Problem Suggested research directions Near-term 

Small signal modeling of power converters, incorporating coupled inductor modeling and flying capacitor balancing (Section IV-A) Adapting averaged switch modeling (ASM) to determine transient performance of newly-proposed Stage 1 converters to optimize response time; incorporating models of coupled inductors into ASM; controlling flying capacitor voltages in hybrid converters as needed Optimal IBV selection, incorporating load variations due to DVFS (Section V-B) Modeling the impact of IBV on losses in Stage 1, Stage 2, and intermediate PDNs; using this model to optimize IBV subject to droop while maximizing system efficiency PDN synthesis for the HI substrate, matched to the on-chiplet PDNs (Section V-D) Adapting template-based PDN synthesis to HI-specific vertical stacks, RDLs, bumps, vias, package pins, chiplet boundary models, and multiple voltage domains, incorporating resource contention between power, signal, and clock interconnects Optimal regulator placement under transient and late-stage loads (Section V-E) Extending macromodel-based placement under static loads to the dynamic load case incorporating PDN impedance, regulator output impedance, control-loop response, decap insertation, and workload current traces 

Medium-term 

Power-delivery-aware chiplet selection dur-ing disaggregation (Section V-A) Incorporating power delivery capabilities of chiplets within a library to identify the optimal methods for disaggregating a system into a chiplet-based implementation Decoupling capacitor insertion using embed-ded HI passives (Section V-F) Adapting decap budgeting to embedded deep-trench and MIM capacitors while modeling region of effectiveness, equivalent series resistance/inductance, via resistance, routing blockage effects, leakage, and proximity to high slew load regions Joint analysis of electrical performance, ther-mal impacts, and reliability consequences for power delivery components in an HI system (Sections IV-D, IV-E) Developing fast multiphysics-based methods for predicting temperature, performance, and electrical/mechanical reliability in HI systems in a coupled manner, using AI methods for early-stage prediction and fast physics-based analyses for late-stage analysis 

Long-term 

Power sharing optimization of PoL convert-ers (Section IV-A) Incorporating a lossless current sensing method for current equalization and/or droop control to prevent thermal runaway and ensure most efficient operation Simultaneous optimization of PDN topol-ogy, decap insertion, and regulator placement (Sections V-D, V-E, V-F) Formulating a coupled multi-objective optimization over topology, regulator sites, and decap allocation, using decomposition or surrogate-assisted search to handle electrical, thermal, area, and routing constraints Modeling methodologies for worst-case tran-sient current workloads across the package-to-chip interface (Section IV-C) Developing workload-aware stimulus modeling that identifies realistic spatial and tempo-ral worst-case excitations, capturing the bursty nature of challenging AI-related workloads for HI systems Exploration of innovative methods for break-ing through the bottleneck of pin count lim-itations for power delivery (Section V-G) Exploring multi-story power delivery techniques with appropriate management of work-load balance to limit losses associated with unrecyclable currents 

Continuing Open benchmarks and realistic synthetic testcases for HI Driving the community to solve realistic problems through the release of open HI testcases with chiplet placement, power maps, voltage domains, package and substrate parasitics, regulator options, decap options, and validated electrical targets 

number of pins. Finally, as a continuing effort, good research requires good data for evaluation, and it is vital to seed efforts that provide open and realistic datasets on which researchers can report and evaluate their techniques. VII. C ONCLUSION 

This paper describes the problems, challenges, and potential solution directions toward creating design methodologies for power delivery in 3D heterogeneously integrated systems. The solution of problems in this area is fast-emerging as a major need for next-generation integrated systems, and today, there are no clear systematic methodologies or techniques that can be applied to general 3D HI systems. The intent of this article has been to list the problems and research opportunities, as well as, where available, summarizing related techniques that could be used to develop solutions to these problems in developing a power delivery architecture, in efficient analysis of these systems, and in optimization techniques that can reliably deliver power to these emerging multi-kW systems. This requires more than incremental adaptation. Compared to 2D designs, the power densities are over an order of magnitude higher, and this is exacerbated by the pin limitation problem. While some solutions from 2D design can be adapted to specific subproblems, the problem requires rethinking of the entire power delivery solution, with greater amounts of distribution in the voltage regulation solutions, and taking into account thermal and reliability issues that arise in these systems. In addition to developing new design techniques, an important issue to address is that of making testcases and benchmarks available to the research community, particularly for machine-learning-based solutions. In this context, it will be important to generate realistic synthetic testcases, as has been done for PDNs in 2D design using machine learning techniques [183], [184]. Addressing all of these challenges will enable the community to develop rapid, reliable, and efficient design methodologies for 3D HI. VIII. A CKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors thank Divya Yogi and Yu (Kevin) Cao for helpful discussions on this topic. REFERENCES [1] B. Dally, “Hardware for deep learning,” in Proc. Hot Chips , 2023. [2] G. Krishnan et al. , “3D-ISC: A 65nm 3D compatible in-sensor comput-ing accelerator with reconfigurable tile architecture for real-time DVS data compression,” in Proc. ASSCC , 2023, 3 pages. [3] S. K. Mandal, G. Krishnan, A. A. Goksoy, G. R. Nair, Y. Cao, and U. Y. Ogras, “COIN: Communication-aware in-memory acceleration for graph convolutional networks,” IEEE J. Emerging Sel. Top. Circuits Syst. , vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 472–485, 2022. [4] W. Wang and M. Ghobadi, “Spine-free networks for LLM training,” 

IEEE Micro , 2025. [5] “Heterogeneous Integration Roadmap,” 2025, Accessed: April 27, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://eps.ieee.org/technology/ heterogeneous-integration-roadmap/ [6] R. Mahajan et al. , “Embedded multi-die interconnect bridge (EMIB) – a high density, high bandwidth packaging interconnect,” in Proc. ECTC , 2016, pp. 557–565. 15 

[7] M.-S. Lin et al. , “A 7nm 4GHz Arm-core-based CoWoS chiplet design for high-performance computing,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits , vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 956–966, 2020. [8] D. B. Ingerly et al. , “Foveros: 3D integration and the use of face-to-face chip stacking for logic devices,” in Proc. IEDM , 2019, pp. 19.6.1–19.6.4. [9] W. Gomes et al. , “Lakefield and mobility compute: A 3D stacked 10nm and 22FFL hybrid processor system in 12×12mm 2, 1mm package-on-package,” in Proc. ISSCC , 2020, pp. 144–146. [10] ——, “Ponte Vecchio: A multi-tile 3D stacked processor for exascale computing,” in Proc. ISSCC , vol. 65, 2022, pp. 42–44. [11] T. Burd et al. , ““Zeppelin”: An SoC for multichip architectures,” IEEE J. Solid-St. Circ. , vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 133–143, 2019. [12] S. Naffziger, K. Lepak, M. Paraschou, and M. Subramony, “AMD chiplet architecture for high-performance server and desktop products,” in Proc. ISSCC , 2020, pp. 44–45. [13] R. Agarwal et al. , “3D packaging for heterogeneous integration,” in 

Proc. ECTC , 2022, pp. 1103–1107. [14] P. Vivet et al. , “IntAct: A 96-core processor with six chiplets 3D-stacked on an active interposer with distributed interconnects and integrated power management,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits , vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 79–97, 2021. [15] S. Pal et al. , “Designing a 2048-chiplet, 14336-core waferscale pro-cessor,” in Proc. DAC , 2021, pp. 1183–1188. [16] A. Shehabi et al. , “2024 United States data center energy usage report,” Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Tech. Rep. LBNL-2001637, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.71468/P1WC7Q [17] W. Tang and M. Iyengar, “Thermal challenges and opportunities in components to system integration for AI,” in IEEE HI Workshop at ECTC , 2025. [18] S. Krishnakumar et al. , “A comprehensive design framework for vertical power delivery in high-performance computing,” IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. , 2026, (early access, 14 pages). [19] P. S. Nalla et al. , “CLAIRE: Composable chiplet libraries for AI inference,” in Proc. DATE , 2025, 6 pages. [20] M. Swaminathan, R. R. Khorasani, I. Partin-Vaisband, R. Sharma, and S. Kumar, “Integrated vertical power delivery – review & challenges,” 

IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. , 2026, (early access, 18 pages). [21] Z. Wang et al. , “HISIM: Analytical performance modeling and design space exploration of 2.5D/3D integration for AI computing,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 3208–3221, 2025. [22] V. Avula, B. Bhattacharyya, V. Smet, Y. Joshi, and M. Swaminathan, “Multiphysics challenges and opportunities for integrated voltage reg-ulators in power delivery architectures,” IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 131–146, 2022. [23] P. R. Prakash et al. , “A 2400 W/in 3 1.8 V bus converter enabling vertical power delivery for next-generation processors,” in Proc. APEC ,2024, pp. 910–917. [24] E. A. Burton et al. , “FIVR – fully integrated voltage regulators on 4th generation Intel® Core™ SoCs,” in Proc. APEC , 2014, pp. 432–439. [25] Y. Safari and B. Vaisband, “Integrated power delivery methodology for 3D ICs,” in Proc. ISQED , 2022, pp. 114–119. [26] H.-P. Le et al. , “Vertical power delivery and heterogeneous integration for high-performance computing,” in Proc. BCICTS , 2023, pp. 32–35. [27] K. Radhakrishnan, M. Swaminathan, and B. K. Bhattacharyya, “Power delivery for high-performance microprocessors – Challenges, solutions, and future trends,” IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 655–671, 2021. [28] C. Hardy et al. , “A scalable heterogeneous integrated two-stage vertical power-delivery architecture for high-performance computing,” in Proc. ISSCC , 2023, pp. 182–184. [29] P. Yeaman, “Datacenter power delivery architectures : Efficiency and annual operating costs,” in Darnell Digital Power Forum , Sep. 2007. [30] P. T. Krein, “Data center challenges and their power electronics,” CPSS Trans. Power Electron. Appl. , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 39–46, 2017. [31] J. Morra and M. Wood, “Disaggregating power in data centers,” 

Electron. Des. , May 2025. [32] P. Sandri, “Increasing hyperscale data center efficiency: A better way to manage 54-V/48-V-to-point-of-load direct conversion,” IEEE Power Electron. Mag. , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 58–64, 2017. [33] C. Wang and P. Jain, “A quantitative comparison and evaluation of 48V DC and 380V DC distribution systems for datacenters,” in Proc. INTELEC , 2014, pp. 1–7. [34] A. Fukui, T. Takeda, K. Hirose, and M. Yamasaki, “HVDC power distribution systems for telecom sites and data centers,” in Proc. ECCE-Asia , 2010, pp. 874–880. [35] R. Kumar, “Breaking the 12-V bottleneck: The shift to 48-V power,” Power Electronic Tips , Nov. 2026, Accessed: April 27, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.powerelectronictips.com/ breaking-the-12-v-bottleneck-the-shift-to-48-v-power/ [36] X. Lyu et al. , “Composite modular power delivery architecture for next-gen 48V data center applications,” in Proc. WiPDA Asia , 2018, pp. 343–350. [37] X. Li and S. Jiang, “Google 48V rack adaptation and onboard power technology update,” Open Compute Project Summit , Mar. 2019. [38] A. Nabih and Q. Li, “Low-profile and high-efficiency 3 kW 400 V-48 V LLC converter with a matrix of four transformers and inductors for 48V power architecture for data centers,” in Proc. ECCE , 2021, pp. 1813–1819. [39] C. Fu, X. Wu, and J. Zhang, “10MHz 48V-12V DCX with 6100W/in 3

power density for future data center applications,” in Proc. APEC ,2026, pp. 126–131. [40] J. Winkler, T. Rumpf, J. Koch, M. C. Wurz, and B. Wicht, “Increasing power density in 48V DC-DC converters using vertically integrated 3D glass power bricks for data center applications,” in Proc. APEC , 2026, pp. 1072–1076. [41] Y. Fang, J. Zou, X. Ke, and L. He, “A 96.1% efficiency 48V-to-IBV GaN power converter with full-wave temperature-compensated current sensing and adaptive slope emulation achieving 4.3% full-temperature sensing error for AI data center applications,” in Proc. CICC , 2025, 3 pages. [42] J. Baek, P. Wang, Y. Elasser, Y. Chen, S. Jiang, and M. Chen, “LEGO-PoL: A 48V-1.5V 300A merged-two-stage hybrid converter for ultra-high-current microprocessors,” in Proc. APEC , 2020, pp. 490–497. [43] J. Baek, P. Wang, S. Jiang, and M. Chen, “LEGO-PoL: A 93.1% 54V-1.5V 300A merged-two-stage hybrid converter with a linear extend-able group operated point-of-load (LEGO-PoL) architecture,” in Proc. COMPEL , 2019, 8 pages. [44] Y. Elasser et al. , “Mini-LEGO CPU voltage regulator,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 3391–3410, Mar. 2024. [45] S. Jiang, S. Saggini, C. Nan, X. Li, C. Chung, and M. Yazdani, “Switched tank converters,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 5048–5062, 2019. [46] Y. Li, X. Lyu, D. Cao, S. Jiang, and C. Nan, “A 98.55% efficiency switched-tank converter for data center application,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , pp. 1–1, 2018. [47] J. Zhu and D. Maksimovi´ c, “A family of transformerless stacked active bridge converters,” in Proc. APEC , 2019, pp. 19–24. [48] Y. Zhu, N. M. Ellis, S. S. Kudva, M. Mosa, C. T. Gray, and R. C. N. Pilawa-Podgurski, “A switching bus converter enabling direct 48-V-to-point-of-load vertical power delivery for high-performance data center processors,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 11 098– 11 119, Jul. 2026. [49] H. Wu, Y. Zhang, and Z. Li, “Hybrid resonant converter-based 8:1 bus converter with 3.5 kW/in 3 and 98.6%-efficient for 48 V data-center power systems,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 36– 41, Jan. 2024. [50] Y. Zhu, T. Ge, N. M. Ellis, L. Horowitz, and R. C. N. Pilawa-Podgurski, “A 500-A/48-to-1-V switching bus converter: A hybrid switched-capacitor voltage regulator with 94.7% peak efficiency and 464-W/in 3 power density,” in Proc. APEC , 2023, pp. 1989–1996. [51] D. Baba, “Benefits of a multiphase buck converter,” 2012, 8 pages, Accessed: April 27, 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //www.ti.com/lit/an/slyt449/slyt449.pdf?ts=1777287451620 [52] C. Parisi, “Multiphase buck design from start to finish (Part 1),” Texas Instruments Inc., Tech. Rep., 2017, 18 pages, Accessed: April 27, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.ti.com/lit/an/slva882b/slva882b.pdf [53] Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, R. Zane, and D. Maksimovic, “Wide-bandwidth digital multi-phase controller,” in Proc. PESC , 2006, 7 pages. [54] Y. Zhu, T. Ge, Z. Ye, and R. C. Pilawa-Podgurski, “A Dickson-squared hybrid switched-capacitor converter for direct 48 V to point-of-load conversion,” in Proc. APEC , Mar. 2022, pp. 1272–1278. [55] R. Das and H.-P. Le, “A regulated 48V-to-1V/100A 90.9%-efficient hybrid converter for POL applications in data centers and telecommu-nication systems,” in Proc. APEC , 2019, pp. 1997–2001. [56] A. Kumar, S. Pervaiz, and K. K. Afridi, “High-performance single-stage isolated 48V-to-1.8V point-of-load converter utilizing impedance control network and distributed transformer,” in Proc. ECCE , 2018, pp. 3838–3843. [57] Y. Zhu, N. M. Ellis, and R. C. N. Pilawa-Podgurski, “Comparative performance analysis of regulated hybrid switched-capacitor topologies for direct 48 V to point-of-load conversion,” IEEE Open J. Power Electron. , vol. 5, pp. 1735–1755, 2024. 16 

[58] M. Ahmed, C. Fei, F. C. Lee, and Q. Li, “High-efficiency high-power-density 48/1V sigma converter voltage regulator module,” in Proc. APEC , Tampa, FL, 2017, pp. 2207–2212. [59] A. Figueroa et al. , “2200A/48V-to-1V low-profile direct power con-verter with standard PCB transformer,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. ,2026, (early access), 14 pages. [60] R. Das, “Topologies, modeling, and control of hybrid switched-capacitor converters,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, Dec. 2022. [61] A. Kumar, “High-performance power converters for telecom and datacenter applications,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, 2018. [62] M. H. Ahmed, C. Fei, V. Li, F. C. Lee, and Q. Li, “Startup and control of high efficiency 48/1V sigma converter,” in Proc. ECCE , 2017, pp. 2010–2016. [63] Navitas, “Navitas debuts revolutionary 800 V–6 V power delivery board at NVIDIA GTC 2026,” Mar. 2026, Accessed: April 27, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://navitassemi.com/ [64] D. Manners, “TI comes up with 800V datacentre power architecture,” 

Electronics Weekly , Mar. 2026. [65] “EPC 800 VDC power architecture for AI data centers,” Oct. 2025, Accessed: April 27, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://epc-co.com/epc/about-epc/events-and-news/news/artmid/1627/ articleid/3241/epc-800-vdc-power-architecture-for-ai-data-centers [66] M. Ahmad, “The transition from 54-V to 800-V power in AI data centers,” EDN , Oct. 2025, Accessed: April 27, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://www.edn.com/ the-transition-from-54-v-to-800-v-power-in-ai-data-centers/#google vignette [67] Z. Ye, M. Popovich, C.-W. Chen, J. Lu, G. Sizikov, and H. Gan, “Towards 10kAmp AI chip: A system perspective from lateral to vertical power delivery,” IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. , 2026, (early access, 12 pages). [68] C. Kong et al. , “A vertical power delivery architecture for high-performance computing,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 6663–6674, 2025. [69] M. H. Ahmed, F. C. Lee, and Q. Li, “Two-stage 48-V VRM with inter-mediate bus voltage optimization for data centers,” IEEE J. Emerging Sel. Top. Power Electron. , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 702–715, 2021. [70] H. Gan et al. , “Vertical power delivery for 1000 Amps machine learning ASICs,” in Proc. APEC , 2024, pp. 906–909. [71] J. Baek et al. , “Vertical stacked LEGO-PoL CPU voltage regulator,” 

IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 6305–6322, 2022. [72] S. Krishnakumar and I. Partin-Vaisband, “Vertical power delivery for emerging packaging and integration platforms – power conversion and distribution,” in Proc. SOCC , 2023, 6 pages. [73] S. Krishnakumar et al. , “Vertical power delivery for high performance computing systems with buck-derived regulators,” in Proc. ECTC ,2024, pp. 2136–2142. [74] H.-P. Le, J. Crossley, S. R. Sanders, and E. Alon, “A sub-ns response fully integrated battery-connected switched-capacitor voltage regulator delivering 0.19W/mm 2 at 73% efficiency,” in Proc. ISSCC , 2013, pp. 372–373. [75] R. Harjani and S. Chaubey, “A unified framework for capacitive series-parallel DC-DC converter design,” in Proc. CICC , 2014, 8 pages. [76] T. Yu and M. D. Wong, “Efficient simulation-based optimization of power grid with on-chip voltage regulator,” in Proc. ASP-DAC , 2014, pp. 531–536. [77] Z. Zeng, X. Ye, Z. Feng, and P. Li, “Tradeoff analysis and optimization of power delivery networks with on-chip voltage regulation,” in Proc. DAC , 2010, pp. 831–836. [78] S. A. Sadat, M. Canbolat, and S. K¨ ose, “Optimal allocation of LDOs and decoupling capacitors within a distributed on-chip power grid,” 

ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst. , vol. 23, no. 4, 2018, 15 pages. [79] P. Zhou, A. Paul, C. H. Kim, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Distributed on-chip switched-capacitor DC–DC converters supporting DVFS in multicore systems,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst. , vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 1954–1967, 2014. [80] V. A. Chhabria and S. S. Sapatnekar, “OpeNPDN: A neural-network-based framework for power delivery network synthesis,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3515– 3528, 2022. [81] K. W. Su et al. , “A scaleable model for STI mechanical stress effect on layout dependence of MOS electrical characteristics,” in Proc. CICC ,2003, pp. 245–248. [82] M. Popovich, M. Sotman, A. Kolodny, and E. G. Friedman, “Effective radii of on-chip decoupling capacitors,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst. , vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 894–907, 2008. [83] H. Su, S. S. Sapatnekar, and S. R. Nassif, “Optimal decoupling capacitor sizing and placement for standard-cell layout designs,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 428–436, 2003. [84] W. Jiang, V. A. Chhabria, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “IR-aware ECO timing optimization using reinforcement learning,” in Proc. MLCAD , 2024, 7 pages. [85] J. Rabaey, Low Power Design Essentials . New York, NY: Springer, 2009. [86] H. Su, J. Hu, S. R. Nassif, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Congestion-driven codesign of power and signal networks,” in Proc. DAC , New Orleans, LA, Jun. 2002, pp. 477–480. [87] G. W. Wester and R. D. Middlebrook, “Low-frequency characterization of switched dc-dc converters,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. , vol. AES-9, no. 3, pp. 376–385, May 1973. [88] R. D. Middlebrook, “A continuous model for the tapped-inductor boost converter,” in Proc. PESC , 1975, pp. 63–79. [89] S. M. Cuk and R. D. Middlebrook, “Modelling, analyses and design of switching converters,” NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, OH, Tech. Rep. TRW-D04803-CFCM, Jan. 1978. [90] A. M. Urling, V. A. Niemela, G. R. Skutt, and T. G. Wilson, “Charac-terizing high-frequency effects in transformer windings – A guide to several significant articles,” in Proc. APEC , 1989, pp. 373–385. [91] R. D. Middlebrook and S. Cuk, “A general unified approach to modelling switching-converter power stages,” in Proc. PESC , 1976, pp. 18–34. [92] V. Vorperian, “Simplified analysis of PWM converters using model of PWM switch Part I: Continuous conduction mode,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. , vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 490–496, May 1990. [93] A. R. Brown and R. D. Middlebrook, “Sampled-data modeling of switching regulators,” in Proc. PESC , Jun. 1981, pp. 349–369. [94] B. Y. Lau and R. D. Middlebrook, “Small-Signal Frequency Re-sponse Theory for piecewise-constant two-switched-network dc-to-dc converter systems,” in Proc. PESC , Jun. 1986, pp. 186–200. [95] R. D. Middlebrook, “Null double injection and the extra element theorem,” IEEE Trans. Educ. , vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 167–180, Aug. 1989. [96] P. S. Shenoy, M. Amaro, J. Morroni, and D. Freeman, “Comparison of a buck converter and a series capacitor buck converter for high-frequency, high-conversion-ratio voltage regulators,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. ,vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 7006–7015, Oct. 2016. [97] Y. Elasser et al. , “Mini-LEGO: A 1.5-MHz 240-A 48-V-to-1-V CPU VRM with 8.4-mm height for vertical power delivery,” in Proc. APEC ,2023, pp. 1959–1966. [98] R. Das and H.-P. Le, “Averaged switch modeling of multi-inductor hybrid converters,” in Proc. COMPEL , 2023, pp. 1–6. [99] M. H. Ahmed, C. Fei, F. C. Lee, and Q. Li, “Single-stage high-efficiency 48/1 V sigma converter with integrated magnetics,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 192–202, Jan. 2020. [100] V. Vorperian, R. Tymerski, and F. Lee, “Equivalent circuit models for resonant and PWM switches,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 205–214, Appl. Phys. Rev. 1989. [101] V. Vorperian, “Simplified analysis of PWM converters using model of PWM switch Part II: Discontinuous conduction mode,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. , vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 497–505, May 1990. [102] J. S. Rentmeister and J. T. Stauth, “A 48V:2V flying capacitor multi-level converter using current-limit control for flying capacitor balance,” in Proc. APEC , 2017, pp. 367–372. [103] A. Stillwell, E. Candan, and R. C. N. Pilawa-Podgurski, “Active voltage balancing in flying capacitor multi-level converters with valley current detection and constant effective duty cycle control,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 11 429–11 441, Nov. 2019. [104] Z. Xia, B. Dobbins, J. S. Rentmeister, and J. T. Stauth, “State space analysis of flying capacitor multilevel DC-DC converters for capacitor voltage estimation,” in Proc. APEC , 2019. [105] J. Celikovic, R. Das, H.-P. Le, and D. Maksimovic, “Modeling of capacitor voltage imbalance in flying capacitor multilevel DC-DC converters,” in Proc. COMPEL , 2019, 8 pages. [106] R. Das, J. Celikovic, S. Abedinpour, M. Mercer, D. Maksimovic, and H.-P. Le, “Demystifying capacitor voltages and inductor currents in hybrid converters,” in Proc. COMPEL , 2019, 8 pages. [107] D. H. Zhou, J. ˇ Celikovi´ c, D. Maksimovi´ c, and M. Chen, “Balancing multiphase FCML converters with coupled inductors: Modeling, anal-ysis, limitations,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 9268–9291, Aug. 2024. [108] P. Wang, D. H. Zhou, Y. Elasser, J. Baek, and M. Chen, “Matrix Coupled All-in-One Magnetics for PWM Power Conversion,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 15 035–15 050, Dec. 2022. 17 

[109] L. L. Qi, M. Gao, and S. Faddel, “Comparative study of four droop control strategies in buck converter based DC microgrid,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. , vol. 60, no. 4, Jul. 2024. [110] G. A. Rinc´ on-Mora, Switched Inductor Power IC Design . Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2023. [111] C. Ho, A. Ruehli, and P. Brennan, “The modified nodal approach to network analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems , vol. CAS-22, no. 6, pp. 504–509, Jun. 1975. [112] A. Devgan, H. Ji, and W. Dai, “How to efficiently capture on-chip inductance effects: Introducing a new circuit element K,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2000, pp. 150–155. [113] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013. [114] M. Zhao, R. V. Panda, S. S. Sapatnekar, and D. Blaauw, “Hierarchical analysis of power distribution networks,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 159–168, Feb. 2002. [115] H. Zhang, D. Yogi, R. Harjani, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Optimal selection and placement of voltage regulators in 2.5D heterogeneously integrated systems,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2025, 9 pages. [116] J. Kozhaya, S. R. Nassif, and F. N. Najm, “A multigrid-like technique for power grid analysis,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 1148–1160, Oct. 2002. [117] H. Su, E. Acar, and S. R. Nassif, “Power grid reduction based on algebraic multigrid principles,” in Proc. DAC , 2003, pp. 109–112. [118] C. Zhuo, J. Hu, M. Zhao, and K. Chen, “Power grid analysis and opti-mization using algebraic multigrid,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems , vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 738–751, 2008. [119] Z. Feng and P. Li, “Multigrid on GPU: Tackling power grid analysis on parallel SIMT platforms,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2008, pp. 647–654. [120] Z. Feng, Z. Zeng, and P. Li, “Parallel on-chip power distribution network analysis on multi-core-multi-GPU platforms,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst. , vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 1823–1836, 2011. [121] U. Trottenberg, C. W. Oosterlee, and A. Schuller, Multigrid . San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2000. [122] V. A. Chhabria, A. B. Kahng, M. Kim, U. Mallappa, S. S. Sapatnekar, and B. Xu, “Template-based PDN synthesis in floorplan and placement using classifier and CNN techniques,” in Proc. ASP-DAC , 2020, pp. 44–49. [123] H. Su, K. H. Gala, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Fast analysis and optimization of power/ground networks,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2000, pp. 477–480. [124] Y. Cao, Y.-M. Lee, T.-H. Chen, and C. C.-P. Chen, “HiPRIME: Hierarchical and passivity reserved interconnect macromodeling engine for RLKC power delivery,” in Proc. DAC , 2002, pp. 379–384. [125] V. A. Chhabria, V. Ahuja, A. Prabhu, N. Patil, P. Jain, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Encoder-decoder networks for analyzing thermal and power delivery networks,” ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst. ,vol. 28, no. 1, Dec. 2022, 27 pages. [126] V. A. Chhabria, Y. Zhang, H. Ren, B. Keller, B. Khailany, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “MAVIREC: ML-aided vectored IR-drop estimation and classification,” in Proc. DATE , 2021, pp. 1825–1828. [127] Z. Yang, Y. Cao, J. Sun, and V. A. Chhabria, “Adaptive graph learning for efficient thermal analysis of multi-stacking chiplet systems under interface variations,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2025, 9 pages. [128] S. S. Sapatnekar, “Addressing thermal and power delivery bottlenecks in 3D circuits,” in Proc. ASP-DAC , 2009, pp. 423–428. [129] Y. Zhan, S. V. Kumar, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Thermally-aware design,” 

Found. Trends in Electron. Des. Autom. , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 255–370, March 2008. [130] N. Karmokar, S.-W. Tam, T. V. D. Dinh, V. A. Chhabria, R. Harjani, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Analyzing the impact of FinFET self-heating on the performance of RF power amplifiers,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2024, 9 pages. [131] B. Goplen and S. Sapatnekar, “Thermal via placement in 3D ICs,” in 

Proc. ISPD , 2005, pp. 167–174. [132] D. Lorenzini et al. , “Embedded single phase microfluidic thermal management for non-uniform heating and hotspots using microgaps with variable pin fin clustering,” Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer , vol. 103, pp. 1359–1370, 2016. [133] C. H. Hoang et al. , “Design and thermal analysis of a 3-D printed im-pingement pin fin cold plate for heterogeneous integration application,” 

IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. , vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 1091–1099, 2022. [134] G. Yan et al. , “Toward TSV-compatible microfluidic cooling for 3D ICs,” IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. , vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104– 112, 2025. [135] M. Choi, S. Krishnakumar, R. Rahimzadeh Khorasani, M. Swami-nathan, I. Partin-Vaisband, and S. Kumar, “Substrate-embedded mi-crofluidic cooling of distributed vertical power delivery architectures for high-performance computing processors,” IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. , vol. 15, no. 9, pp. 1912–1920, 2025. [136] M. Choi et al. , “Self-consistent electrothermal modeling of distributed vertical power delivery architecture with substrate-embedded microflu-idic cooling,” IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. , vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 1534–1542, 2026. [137] J. Fang et al. , “Circuit reliability: From physics to architectures: Embedded tutorial paper,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2012, pp. 243–246. [138] F. Najm and V. Sukharev, “Electromigration simulation and design considerations for integrated circuit power grids,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 063 204:1–063 204:12, Nov/Dec 2020. [139] F. N. Najm, “Equivalent circuits for electromigration,” Microelectron. Rel. , pp. 114 200:1–114 200:16, Aug. 2021. [140] M. A. Al Shohel, V. A. Chhabria, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “A new, computationally efficient ‘Blech criterion’ for immortality in general interconnects,” Proc. DAC , 2021, 6 pages. [141] M. A. Al Shohel, V. A. Chhabria, N. Evmorfopoulos, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Analytical modeling of transient electromigration stress based on boundary reflections,” Proc. ICCAD , 2021, 8 pages. [142] ——, “Frequency-domain transient electromigration analysis using circuit theory,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2023, 8 pages. [143] ——, “An analytical solution for transient electromigration stress in multisegment straight-line interconnects based on a stress-wave model,” 

ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron. Syst. , vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 57:1 – 57:31, 2025. [144] V. Mishra and S. S. Sapatnekar, “The impact of electromigration in copper interconnects on power grid integrity,” in Proc. DAC , 2013, 6 pages. [145] H. Xiong, Z. Huang, and P. Conway, “Effects of stress and electro-migration on microstructural evolution in microbumps of three-dimensional integrated circuits,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliab. ,vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 995–1004, 2014. [146] Z. Shen, S. Jing, Y. Heng, Y. Yao, K. N. Tu, and Y. Liu, “Electro-migration in three-dimensional integrated circuits,” Appl. Phys. Rev. ,vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 021 309:1–021 309:30, 05 2023. [147] S. K. Marella and S. S. Sapatnekar, “A holistic analysis of circuit performance variations in 3-D ICs with thermal and TSV-induced stress considerations,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst. , vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 1308–1321, 2015. [148] A. Kteyan and V. Sukharev, “Physics-based simulation of stress-induced and electromigration-induced voiding and their interactions in on-chip interconnects,” Microelectron. Eng. , vol. 247, pp. 111 585:1– 111 585:7, 2021. [149] F. Li et al. , “GIA: A reusable general interposer architecture for agile chiplet integration,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2022, 9 pages. [150] C. C. Sudarshan, N. Matkar, S. Vrudhula, S. S. Sapatnekar, and V. A. Chhabria, “ECO-CHIP: Estimation of carbon footprint of chiplet-based architectures for sustainable VLSI,” in Proc. HPCA , 2024, pp. 671–685. [151] H. Lin et al. , “Efficient backside power delivery for high-performance computing systems,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst. , vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1748– 1756, 2022. [152] A. Veloso et al. , “Scaled FinFETs connected by using both wafer sides for routing via buried power rails,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Technol. Circuits , 2022, pp. 284–285. [153] W. Hafez et al. , “Intel PowerVia technology: Backside power delivery for high density and high-performance computing,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Technol. Circuits , 2023, 2 pages. [154] S. Krishnakumar and I. Partin-Vaisband, “Dynamic power manage-ment methodology for distributed vertical power delivery in high-performance computing systems,” in Proc. ECTC , 2026, pp. 979–984. [155] P. Yue and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Intermediate bus voltage selection for vertical power delivery in 2.5D integrated systems,” (under review). [156] H.-P. Le, S. R. Sanders, and E. Alon, “Design techniques for fully integrated switched-capacitor DC-DC converters,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits , vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 2120–2131, 2011. [157] M. D. Seeman and S. R. Sanders, “Analysis and optimization of switched-capacitor DC-DC converters,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. ,vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 841–851, 2008. [158] J. De Vos, D. Flandre, and D. Bol, “A sizing methodology for on-chip switched-capacitor DC-DC converters,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I Regul. Pap. , vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1597–1606, 2014. [159] T. M. Andersen et al. , “Modeling and Pareto optimization of on-chip switched capacitor converters,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. , vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 363–377, 2017. 18 

[160] S. X. D. Tan, C.-J. R. Shi, and J.-C. Lee, “Reliability-constrained area optimization of vlsi power/ground networks via sequence of linear programmings,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. ,vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 1678–1684, 2003. [161] J. Singh and S. Sapatnekar, “Congestion-aware topology optimization of structured power/ground networks,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 683–695, 2005. [162] A. Todri-Sanial, S. Kundu, P. Girard, A. Bosio, L. Dilillo, and A. Virazel, “Globally constrained locally optimized 3-d power delivery networks,” IEEE T. Comput. Aid. D. , vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 2131–2144, 2014. [163] M. S. Gupta, J. L. Oatley, R. Joseph, G.-Y. Wei, and D. M. Brooks, “Understanding voltage variations in chip multiprocessors using a distributed power-delivery network,” in Proc. DATE , 2007, 6 pages. [164] L. Wang, S. K. Khatamifard, O. A. Uzun, U. R. Karpuzcu, and S. K¨ ose, “Efficiency, stability, and reliability implications of unbalanced current sharing among distributed on-chip voltage regulators,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst. , vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3019–3032, 2017. [165] R. Bairamkulov and E. G. Friedman, “Power aware placement of on-chip voltage regulators,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 654–666, 2023. [166] J. Gu, H. Eom, and C. H. Kim, “A switched decoupling capacitor circuit for on-chip supply resonance damping,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Circuits , 2007, pp. 126–127. [167] J. Xu et al. , “On-die supply-resonance suppression using band-limited active damping,” in Proc. ISSCC , 2007, pp. 286–603. [168] E. Wong, J. Minz, and S. K. Lim, “Decoupling capacitor planning and sizing for noise and leakage reduction,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2006, pp. 395–400. [169] G. Huang, M. Bakir, A. Naeemi, H. Chen, and J. D. Meindl, “Power delivery for 3D chip stacks: Physical modeling and design implication,” in Proc. EPEP , 2007, pp. 205–208. [170] P. Zhou and S. S. Sapatnekar, “Congestion-aware power grid optimiza-tion for 3D circuits using MIM and CMOS decoupling capacitors,” in 

Proc. ASP-DAC , 2009, pp. 179–184. [171] K. T. Kannan and S. S. Iyer, “Deep trench capacitors in silicon interconnect fabric,” in Proc. ECTC , 2020, pp. 2295–2301. [172] H. Park et al. , “Deep reinforcement learning-based optimal decoupling capacitor design method for silicon interposer-based 2.5-D/3-D ICs,” 

IEEE Trans. Compon. Packag. Technol. , vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 467–478, 2020. [173] A. Todri, M. Marek-Sadowska, F. Maire, and C. Matheron, “A study of decoupling capacitor effectiveness in power and ground grid networks,” in Proc. ISQED , 2009, pp. 653–658. [174] J. Gu and C. H. Kim, “Multi-story power delivery for supply noise reduction and low voltage operation,” in Proc. ISLPED , 2005, pp. 192– 197. [175] S. Rajapandian, K. Shepard, P. Hazucha, and T. Karnik, “High-tension power delivery: Operating 0.18 μm CMOS digital logic at 5.4V,” in 

Proc. ISSCC , 2005, pp. 298–599. [176] P. Jain, T. Kim, J. Keane, and C. H. Kim, “A multi-story power delivery technique for 3D integrated circuits,” in Proc. ISLPED , 2008, pp. 57– 62. [177] Y. Zhan and S. S. Sapatnekar, “High efficiency Green function-based thermal simulation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst. , vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1661–1675, September 2007. [178] R. A. Abramson, Z. Ye, T. Ge, and R. C. N. Pilawa-Podgurski, “A high performance 48-to-6 V multi-resonant cascaded series-parallel (CaSP) switched-capacitor converter,” in Proc. APEC , 2021, pp. 1328–1334. [179] Monolithic Power Systems, “48V Datacenter Solutions: DC/DC Power Conversion for Datacenter, Open Compute, and AI Applications,” 2023, Product brochure, Q3 2023. Accessed: July 16th, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://media.monolithicpower.com/mps cms document/4/ 8/48v solution product brochure-q3-2023.pdf [180] N. Butzen et al. , “A monolithic 26 A/mm 2 continuously scalable conversion ratio switched-capacitor converter with phase-merging turbo and communication-less ganging,” IEEE Solid-State Circuits Letters ,vol. 6, pp. 273–276, 2023. [181] Q. Lu, S. Li, B. Zhao, J. Jiang, Z. Chen, and S. Du, “A dynamically reconfigurable recursive switched-capacitor DC–DC converter with adaptive load ability enhancement,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron. ,vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 5032–5040, 2023. [182] P. Assem, “Integrated hybrid switched-capacitor converters for point of load power delivery,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 2022, tech. Rep. UCB/EECS-2022-243. [183] V. A. Chhabria, K. Kunal, M. Zabihi, and S. S. Sapatnekar, “BeGAN: Power grid benchmark generation using a process-portable GAN-based methodology,” in Proc. ICCAD , 2021, 8 pages. [184] B.-Y. Wu and V. A. Chhabria, “DALI-PD: Diffusion-based synthetic layout heatmap generation for ML in physical design,” in Proc. ASP-DAC , 2026, 7 pages.